2////If you’ve ever had a visual migraine, you know what it’s like: There’s a prism in the visual field that distorts everything. Now imagine that prism as something enormous, covering a wide swath of land. And then imagine it being possible to walk into that prism, into that separate world within a world.In the movie “Annihilation,” that prism is called the “shimmer,” and no one knows where it came from. However, it’s certain that it’s getting bigger, and that does not bode well. “Annihilation” is an attempt to make a thinking-person’s sci-fi movie, and director Alex Garland (“Ex Machina”), in adapting the novel by Jeff VanderMeer, has created a sober movie full of interesting ideas. But he neglected to remember that thinking people also like a little drama with their science fiction. On that score, “Annihilation” comes up short.This is not to say that the movie lacks incident. There’s action and suspense, and there are eerie moments. But “Annihilation” fails to do the essential thing. It fails to motivate the central characters.Much of the film, for example, involves people going on an expedition into the shimmer, which could easily turn out to be a suicide mission. Yet, not one of them has an active motive for doing so. No one has fire and purpose and a reason to risk everything. Instead it’s just people stumbling into things, either because they’re depressed, or they feel they have nothing to lose, or they’re doing as they’ve been told.Natalie Portman Calls Mille Bobby Brown Her 'Own Magical Person' Portman sat down with MTV News and gushed over Brown, who many people think is a smaller version of Portman. “I met Millie at the Golden Globes a few months ago. She came up to me and was like, ‘People keep telling me I look like the kid version of you!'" “I was so flattered because she’s absolutely adorable and so talented. I’m like, ‘That is very nice, but I think you’re your own magical person.’" Brown then retweeted the interview, calling meeting Portman "a dream come true."It’s just dull to watch characters that, at most, care no more about what they’re doing than you do — and that’s true even if one of them is played by Natalie Portman and another is played by Jennifer Jason Leigh. Monsters could be eating their friends. The fate of human civilization could be in their hands. If they don’t have a strong desire to overcome obstacles and accomplish something, the movie is reduced to just a bunch of stuff happening.“Annihilation” starts well. Natalie Portman is a biology professor at Johns Hopkins University, whose soldier husband (Oscar Isaac) disappeared a year ago while on a secret mission. She remains grief stricken; and then one night, he reappears, but it’s no joyful reunion. He can tell her nothing of where he’s been, and it soon becomes clear that he’s seriously ill. Soon, they’re both in a military hospital, where one of the doctors, a military psychiatrist played by Leigh, tells the professor all about the shimmer.Any movie that gives Jennifer Jason Leigh a major role in which she gets to act spooky and weird can’t be all bad. “Annihilation” is also, rather in passing, a women’s war movie, in that the psychiatrist leads a team of uniformed women into the shimmer. That’s something, too. But these are the kinds of things you have to think about to appreciate. “Annihilation” leaves audiences with plenty of time to think — about their taxes, about what to eat when the movie is over, etc. — because it’s so uninvolving.Or you might think this, that the shimmer world represents the unconscious, the place of no rules, terror, and infinite possibility. “Annihilation” indulges in too much grotesque gore (when even I’m averting my eyes, after all I’ve sat through, that tells you something). But there are simpler nightmare moments, as when Portman finds herself in a room she can’t escape, that are haunting.But no, “Annihilation” really isn’t worth seeing. Still, if you meet someone who has seen it, have them tell you the good parts.
8////“Game Night” is not trying to be an important social document or a work of art. There’s nothing here designed to create a sense of awe or win awards or be remembered more than a year from now. It’s not a movie that will make you tired, but lack of ambition can sometimes be a strength. This is a comedy-thriller made simply to please in the moment, and it does, for almost every minute of its 100-minute running time.The movie achieves, in a seemingly offhand way, a balance between laugh-out-loud setups and scenes that are tense and yet never lose their comic shading. Here and there — we’re talking only about scattered moments — the zaniness gets overplayed. But for the most part, “Game Night” is skillfully crafted entertainment, put over by a talented cast that knows how to land a laugh.It was directed by John Francis Daley and Jonathan Goldstein, the duo responsible for “Vacation,” the 2015 comedy that took the old family film starring Chevy Chase and turned it into an outrageous, coarse delight. The new movie, written by Mark Perez, is at least as delightful though not as coarse. At its center is a couple that loves to play games. Max (Jason Bateman) and Annie (Rachel McAdams) met playing a pub quiz, and they host game nights at their house for a tight group of friends.Their lives become complicated by the arrival in town of Max’s brother, a wealthy financial tycoon who is better looking than Max and who enjoys undermining his little brother’s confidence. Brooks (Kyle Chandler) holds a game night in his palatial new house, but the evening doesn’t consist of the usual charades or Pictionary. Instead, Brooks announces that everyone present will be witness to a crime, and the prize will go to whoever solves it.“Game Night” is a new action-comedy starring Jason Bateman and Rachel McAdams.You may have seen this kind of thing before, in movies such as the old ’70s thriller “The Last of Sheila” and the Michael Douglas movie “The Game,” where something starts out a game and then turns serious, or maybe only seems to be serious. But Perez’s script acknowledges that and actually capitalizes on the fact that the audience is ahead of the story. For a good chunk of the movie, for example, part of the fun is knowing that the guns are real that Max and Annie believe to be fake, and that the desperate characters that they assume to be actors are not acting.The screenplay also shows considerable nimbleness, in that when it switches out of game mode, it finds other ways to create interest and even gain velocity. A key to the movie’s success, modest though it may be, is that the filmmakers approach no scenes or characters as though they were merely functional. Everything and everyone is an opportunity for some extra laugh or some unexpected twist of character or performance.This extends even to the minor roles. At one point, the protagonists walk into a party thrown by a morally depraved billionaire. The billionaire has maybe three or four lines in the whole movie, but he’s played by Danny Huston, who has played so many high-living villains that he brings those associations with him. Likewise, Michael C. Hall has only two scenes as the criminal mastermind known as “The Bulgarian,” but he creates a comic study in weary, tired-of-it-all evil.“Game Night” devises running gags throughout the movie and then comes up with ways to keep topping them so they don’t get old. A good example of that is the bit involving a husband (Lamorne Morris) who suspects that his wife (Kylie Bunbury) might have had a one-night stand with Denzel Washington.“Game Night” won’t change anyone’s life, but if you go to the multiplex and “Black Panther” is sold out, you don’t have to go home. This little movie will do just fine.
5////“Nostalgia” gets credit for being different and sincere and for trying to capture a feeling that movies don’t often deal with. The feeling is not exactly nostalgia, though it’s related to wishing for the past. The feeling is more like loss, grief and free-floating despair, the dislocation that comes from being permanently unhappy and knowing it.The result is a movie that’s more interesting to talk about than watch, but that’s fine for our purposes, because right now we’re talking, not watching. The movie flows from one character to another, with no one person being the focus. In the first scene, we see a pregnant waitress, in close-up, and the voice of a man, off camera, asking her questions about the upcoming baby. The face of the waitress (Shinelle Azoroh) is warm and vivid, and she is filmed with such tenderness by director Mark Pellington that we settle in for a searching and sensitive movie.That’s the last we see of the waitress. We follow the man, who turns out to be a claims adjuster (John Ortiz), looking through the property of an old man (Bruce Dern), trying to find out if he owns anything of unexpected value. The old man is a difficult character — of course he is; he’s played by Bruce Dern — and yet somehow, not so much through the dialogue as around it, we get the sense of the man’s loneliness and his desire to reach out to this stranger.Next stop: Ellen Burstyn, as Helen, a woman whose house has burned down — or maybe she just ate all the scenery, and it only looks like that. For a while, we wonder: Is this the deal? A claims adjuster is going to visit every octogenarian star of the 1970s? But no. The movie drops the claims adjuster and starts following Burstyn, who tears up everywhere, and every time she does, Pellington has his camera ready for a close-up. For an actress of Burstyn’s emotive proclivities, this is like a license to print money.Steven Soderbergh's psychological horror-thriller film  Unsane  premiered at the Berlin Film Festival with English actess Claire Foy and American actor Joshua Leonard in the lead roles.     Unsane  tells the story of a successful young businesswoman who believes a man from her past is stalking her. She suddenly finds herself trapped in a mental institution against her will and the stalker is amongst the nursing staff trying to manipulate her.     The movie was shot with an iPhone and Leonard says it has a definite theatrical feel: "We really approached it like a play sometimes because the scenes were so long, but it's fun doing it with these guys."   Soderbergh says he has a very 'hands-off' approach to his actors.     "I try to leave them alone as much as I can," he explains. "I think you'd be surprised at how little I talk. We discuss it beforehand, but once we get on the set we just go to work."   Foy says she found the filming itself claustrophobic.     "We were shooting in the same place for 10 days and we were shooting pretty rapidly," she says. "It did feel like we were all in some sort of weird Steven Soderbergh institution that he'd created."   The movie will be released in Europe in MarchFor more than half the movie, “Nostalgia” is about stuff. Yes, it’s also about the emotions and memories that the stuff embodies, but the emphasis is on the objects themselves, and the concern surrounding these objects begins to seem outsize. Helen, for example, has a baseball signed by Ted Williams that was the prized possession of her dead husband. And she is as boring about trying to decide whether to sell that ball as, well, anyone in real life would be who couldn’t stop talking about a ball. And crying about it.Meanwhile, the lesson of life is that the objects don’t matter as much as we think, right? For example, did you ever leave a place where you were happy — say, a hotel room or a house where you spent a vacation — and turn around at the door to take a last look and say goodbye? But then a few years passes, or even a month, and you realize that everything you had from that room, from that structure, you still have. It doesn’t go away, because it was never really about those walls or that picture on the wall. Well, no one in “Nostalgia” seems to know this. They’re just stuck looking at stuff.The performances are heavy-handed, except for that of Jon Hamm, who benefits not only from playing something of a wise guy (a sports memorabilia salesman), but also from his own unsentimental instincts. The long pauses, the weepiness and the dreamy introspection of the other characters are compounded by Laurent Eyquem’s score, which has a quality of suspending every scene in a thick soup of sound. We can’t get at the actors, and they can’t get to us. Maybe it’s better that way.Still, even if it didn’t quite work out, it’s nice that somebody tried something.
8////The world is always present in the films of Sally Potter, waiting outside, guiding and influencing the lives of people within her specific and intense gaze. And so it is in “The Party,” her confident and economical chamber piece, a full and satisfying experience that clocks in at only 71 minutes.The occasion for celebration is the election of Janet (Kristin Scott Thomas), who has become a minister of Parliament and the shadow minister of health. That is, she will be the health minister if her political party comes into power. As Thomas can often seem, she is a study in competence, integrating visitors and congratulatory phone calls into a steady stream, while chopping onions and preparing dinner.But something doesn’t feel right. Although the party should be a happy one, an aura of defeat and disappointment hangs over the house. Her closest friends — played by Patricia Clarkson and Cherry Jones — can’t conceal a certain ambivalence about Janet’s elevation. Meanwhile, Janet’s husband, Bill (Timothy Spall) sits in the living room with a zombie-like expression, as if stricken by the realization that he’s about to become Margaret Thatcher’s husband.As you can tell already, Potter (“Orlando,” “Ginger & Rosa”) has attracted a strong cast, and that strength extends to all the roles. Emily Mortimer plays Jones’ pregnant lover, who announces triumphantly that she is having triplets — and expects this to be greeted as good news. Cillian Murphy is an Irish investment banker, who looks swell in his expensive suit, but keeps running into the bathroom to snort cocaine. And best of all, there’s Bruno Ganz as Gottfried, looking as loony-radiant as Timothy Leary as he spouts new-age bromides.The untold story we've all been waiting for is almost here.Shot in a glossy, appealing black-and-white and filmed in a single location, “The Party” generates a pressure-cooker atmosphere. The characters’ clashing grievances bespeak an underlying middle-aged and late-middle-age despair, the sense of people carrying on despite an uneasy sense that there is no point. Considering that the characters are all professional altruists, this encroaching nihilism suggests a larger significance. There’s something wrong, not just in the room, but outside.This feeling is not easy to explain or define. If it were, there might have been no need for Potter to express it through art. But its overall sense is that something is giving way, that the civility with which these people live their lives and the reality that they have assumed are simply not adequate to the challenges outside their doorstep. The world is caving in, and the strain of pretending otherwise is starting to show.
5////In a case of bringing coals to Newcastle and selling snow to the Eskimos, “Detective Chinatown 2” is an action movie imported from China. As we already have that aspect of cinema covered many times over — and as this is only an OK version of the form, nothing outstanding — it would be hard to make a case for why anyone, or at least anyone who doesn’t speak Mandarin, should run out to see this movie.However, there is one thing that will be of particular interest to American viewers, and that’s seeing America through another culture’s eyes. The film takes place, for example, in New York City, and something about the physical portrait of New York is just a little different from anything I’ve ever seen. The buildings and the bridges look beautiful, bathed in an unnatural kind of sunlight, while the streets are menacing.There are guns everywhere, and stereotypes, as well. One of the characters teaches a Chinese language class to African Americans, who all turn out to be heavily armed gang members. At one point, someone goes into a biker bar, and the bearded white bikers all have machine guns. Meanwhile, the chief of police is a big, heavy guy with weird hair, a Trump lookalike, who says that the president should build a wall on the West Coast to keep the Asians out.But some things are universal. For example, the detective duo consists of a funny guy, Tang (Wang Baoqiang, who looks like an Asian “Columbo”-era Peter Falk) and a more laid-back, handsome guy, Feng (Liu Haoran). They’re in New York, along with a consortium of other detectives, to find the perpetrator of a series of ritualistic murders. If they crack the case first, they’ll win a $5 million prize. There to provide occasional assistance is a Chinese American New York police detective, played by the very poised Australian actress Natasha Liu Bordizzo.100 years ago, Carbon County, Wyoming was home to Americaâs first coal mine. A century later, Carbon County is getting into wind energy. And itâs taking coal workers with it, thanks to the Chinese wind-turbine manufacturing company Goldwind. At aThe pace is quick, very quick by American standards. The script blasts through reams of plot with lightning dialogue, and even if you have a fast eye for subtitles you may come to the end of the movie with no clear idea what happened.Still, there’s a nice fluidity to director Chen Sicheng’s filmmaking, as when the characters discuss the various crime scenes and we suddenly find ourselves moving seamlessly from location to location. The special effects are first-rate, as when Feng imagines Manhattan island and starts flying through it in his mind, moving some buildings aside and uprooting others that are in his way. The original, “Detective Chinatown,” grossed more than $100 million in China, and money was clearly lavished on the sequel.
5////The pleasures of Francois Ozon’s “Double Lover” are entirely on the order of “Wow. He actually did that.” The first example of this is the movie’s very first shot: The screen is filled with a mysterious landscape of human viscera. And then the shot pulls back, and we realize that we have been looking at a vagina as seen through a speculum.Then Ozon tops this. The vagina turns into an eye — the eye of young Chloe (Marine Vacth), who has gone to the doctor because her stomach keeps hurting. The gynecologist tells her the same thing that every specialist has told her, that her problem is probably psychological. So her next stop is at a psychiatrist’s office, and that’s were our story begins.Based on Joyce Carol Oates’ short novel “The Lives of the Twins,” “Double Lover” was directed and co-written by Ozon, a French filmmaker who even at his worst is interesting and at his best is something more. His previous film, “Frantz,” for example, was moving and subtle and one of his finest achievements. “Double Lover,” however, just stays in the realm of interesting. It’s amusing to see what Ozon is up to, but the central character and her problems remain simply matters of curiosity mixed with indifference.Chloe is 25, unemployed and has depression and anxiety. She goes to Paul (Jérémie Renier), a psychiatrist, who listens to the story of her life, and something happens to him that emphatically does not happen to the audience. He falls in love with her. Chloe gets a job in a museum and declares herself cured, and he ends their therapy and starts a relationship with her. They move in together.An international team of researchers has observed thinning in the ozone layer.And that is one of the last things to happen in “Double Lover” that we can say for sure actually happens. Much of what follows depicts events that may or may not be taking place in Chloe’s imagination. Or to be more specific, some of the events presented are entirely imaginary, some are partly imaginary, and some are probably real.All this was undoubtedly quite interesting for Ozon to work out, but the practical effect is one of distance, that of a very French intellectual exercise that assumes we care more than we do about what’s real and what isn’t. Part of the problem is that Ozon gives Vacth more than she can carry. He accepts on faith that Chloe and the actress playing her possess some inherent fascination, but Vacth isn’t Greta Garbo. You can’t just put a camera on her and expect the audience to become hypnotized. Left with nothing but the question of whether Chloe is nuts, a little nuts or not nuts, the innermost response for most viewers will be a quiet “Who cares?”Still, Ozon is never one to take his audience for granted, and so he keeps coming up with ways to jolt viewers, and some of those ways are inventive and audacious. For example, Chloe goes to visit an invalid her own age, and the young woman’s mother — played by Jacqueline Bisset — seems reasonable, polite and middle-class. And then there’s an odd shift, and Bisset turns on Chloe viciously. That vicious turn is beautifully executed by Bisset and is probably her reason for taking a featured role in the first place.So there you have it. Voila, the new Ozon. As was the case with Claude Chabrol and remains the case with Woody Allen, there’s usually one a year, so if you don’t like this one, you’ll probably like the next one. And in the meantime, we have Ozon doing his Ozon thing, and that’s not bad.
8////This image provided by Marvel Comics shows the variant cover of Black Panther #1 written by Ta-Nehisi Coates on sale in May 2018 featuring his new storyline The Intergalactic Empire of Wakanda. The cover was drawn by InHyuk Lee. As people gear up for the "Black Panther" movie, acclaimed author Ta-Nehisi Coates wants them to check out the original source, Marvel's Black Panther comic book, where he's booting up a massive outer space adventure for the king of Wakanda.This image provided by Marvel Comics shows the variant cover of Black Panther #1 written by Ta-Nehisi Coates on sale in May 2018 featuring his new storyline The Intergalactic Empire of Wakanda. The cover was“Black Panther” is grand-scale. It’s serious. And it represents a jumble of modern ideas and hopes that make it very much of this moment.There have been black superhero movies before — “Hancock,” “Meteor Man” and “Blade,” to name a few — but something feels different this time around. This one is coming from a deep place, and this time the whole world is interested.We usually see this kind of movie in May, a superhero blockbuster from Marvel Studios, except it’s better than most of those. These days action movies almost always begin with a bang. This one eases in slowly. For the first 20 minutes, one might even call “Black Panther” slow, but that wouldn’t be the right word. It’s measured. It takes its time and sets up a big story.In “Black Panther,” we are told of a small African nation that has the entire world fooled. Everyone thinks Wakanda is a Third World country, agrarian and self-sufficient, but impoverished. In fact, it secretly holds inexhaustible supplies of a metal called Vibranium, which is not only the ideal lining for a superhero costume, it can also be used to build high-speed rail systems and cure spinal injuries. Wakanda is the most advanced civilization and culture in the world, but it has an understandable distrust of other countries. If another nation were to gain control of the Vibranium, it could use it to enslave the world.FOX 32's Bill Zwecker sits down with Black Panther star Chadwick Boseman.These anxieties make Black Panther into a different kind of superhero. He is not like Spider-Man or Batman, always looking for trouble. Black Panther — in real life, T’Challa (Chadwick Boseman), Wakanda’s crown prince — wants as little conflict as possible. Even when he gets into conflict, it’s to avoid conflict, to keep a tight lid on things, so his country can continue to live as the envy of the world ... without having to suffer the consequences of the world’s envy.When T’Challa becomes king, he inherits his father’s isolationist, anti-immigrant policy. And immediately, there’s a new crisis: A British career criminal, Klaue (Andy Serkis), has teamed up with an Oakland-born man, Erik Killmonger (Michael B. Jordan), to use the small amount of Vibranium they’ve been able to salvage in order to power their way into Wakanda and take the country over.Klaue is a chaos agent, a cackling sadist and, as played by Serkis, wonderfully and exuberantly repulsive, someone without a conscience. But Erik is a more complicated figure, driven by rage. He lost his father while still a young boy, grew up on the streets and has intellectualized his anger into an anarchist philosophy, a determination to supply the world’s dissidents with invincible weaponry.Erik’s position is extreme, but his point of view provides an interesting point of tension for viewers. Wakanda is a beautiful country, with violet electric-looking sunsets, lakes and mountains, and a skyline that makes Shanghai’s look antiquated. The rest of the world is dying of diseases and injuries that the Wakandans already know how to cure. Are they obligated to share this knowledge, which they’ve gained through their own industry, stable governance and unusual civic sanity?The script, co-written by director Ryan Coogler and Joe Robert Cole, does something that is almost unique. It expresses the filmmakers’ sentiments through the villain. Or at least it makes the villain into someone not entirely wrong. At the same time, everything that the movie shows us about Wakanda (as opposed to telling us through dialogue) pulls the audience in the other direction, making us wish these people might be able to hold onto what they have in pristine privacy. These are tensions not only within the movie, but within the audience, and they’re traditionally American. Immigrants came to America, after all, just so they wouldn’t be bothered.If Coogler were less of a filmmaker, he would have softened Erik at the expense of the movie’s rooting interest and drama. Instead he lets the movie’s ideas take care of themselves and stays focused on T’Challa’s decency and heroism and on Erik as a moral monster — or, as T’Challa puts it, a “monster of our making.”But who is “our” here? Is T’Challa talking about Wakanda exclusively, or is he speaking for the filmmakers and referencing the United States?In any case, Boseman commands every moment of this film, radiating probity and purpose, and it’s only later on that you realize that, with another actor, this wouldn’t have been a sure thing. The Black Panther is a superhero with lots of uncertainty. He has to grow into his stature, and we see it happen.Lupita Nyong’o brings force and energy to the role of Nakia, T’Challa’s warrior girlfriend, and the British actor Martin Freeman successfully goes American, playing a CIA agent.And, oh yes, the action: How nice to see an action movie that has lots of other things to talk about. The action is fine. The action is good. There are a number of exciting sequences, particularly a chase scene about a half-hour into the film. But there’s probably less action in this superhero movie than any other of recent vintage, or at least it seems that way. For sure, there are no stand-alone set pieces. The action is integrated into the movie’s flow, and it’s just better that way.
8////Trailer for the movie "Fifty Shades Freed."Now that the trilogy is completed, it’s time to stop smirking and say a few nice things about the “Fifty Shades” series.The first is that we’ve been watching these people have sex for three movies now, and the sex hasn’t gotten boring yet, not for them, certainly, but not even for us. They’ve been strenuously keeping it interesting for three whole movies, and they deserve credit for that.The second nice thing pertains to the new installment, in particular. The opening moments of “Fifty Shades Freed” depict the wedding of the billionaire Christian Grey (Jamie Dornan) and the languid yet game Anastasia Steele (Dakota Johnson). And you know how every newlywed tells you that being married somehow makes things different? Well, the marriage of the two central characters makes this movie different from its two predecessors and in ways that are helpful.The first installment in the series was a getting-acquainted story with elements of sadomasochism and bondage thrown in. The second installment was about a deepening relationship made complicated by the intrusion of a psycho who wanted to kill one or both of them. Basically, the first two films dealt in common movie tropes jazzed up by a particular sexual atmosphere.But “Fifty Shades Freed” has something extra going for it, in that it depicts something that movies and pop songs and pop culture in general tend to avoid, which is the romance of familiarity. Yes, the psycho is still loose and wants to kill both of them, especially Anastasia. But he’s mostly on the fringes of the story, adding the possibility of danger and the illusion of action, while the movie stays focused on its real business, which is all about flying to Paris on a private jet, or tending to one’s tan at an exclusive resort.At heart, this is really a movie about minor (and inevitable) honeymoon bickering, and the process of choosing a place to live and setting up a household. And yes, sure, as they drive back from their new property, they notice that the psycho is following them in a blue van, and that threat becomes the catalyst for a reasonably exciting chase scene. But the scene’s real purpose doesn’t come until they lose him, park the car and start having sex in the front seat.Has there been a movie since the 1970s — since the uncomplicated, post-syphilis and pre-herpes, pre-AIDS era of “The Harrad Experiment” — that has believed in sex this much? That has endorsed sex with such wholehearted, unabashed enthusiasm? They have sex with vibrators, sex with ice cream, sex with no props at all, and it seems like a very nice thing that these newlyweds are so into each other. “Fifty Shades Freed” arrives in a world has not stopped throwing up thinking about Harvey Weinstein, and its pagan joie de vivre comes as blessed relief from ugly thoughts of awful people.The essential thing is this: As silly as the movie is, and it’s silly in many ways, it accomplishes the fundamental task of making you believe that this is a young couple in love. At one point, Christian sits at a piano and starts playing Paul McCartney’s “Maybe I’m Amazed,” and as obvious as the moment is, it also feels right, because that song is also about the romance of familiarity. McCartney and novelist E.L. James are, in their different ways, more or less talking about the same emotions.Another nice thing about this movie, and also a curious thing: It seems to be arranged as a series of five-minute interludes, a surprising number of which are entertaining, even if they can almost feel unrelated. She has a nightmare. Then they have sex on the kitchen table. Then she visits the doctor. Then she goes to the psycho’s bail hearing. ... It’s just one thing after another, but it’s mostly fun.That’s everything good. Now for the bad part. “Fifty Shades Freed” is ridiculous. Aside from the interactions between Christian and Anastasia, the dialogue is laughable, and the turns of plot are absurd. Even the overarching story — Anastasia’s former boss at the publishing house is transformed into a homicidal maniac — is pretty much a joke.Yet it’s weird how some things in movies matter less than others. I like these people. I’m rather sorry to see this series end. 
8////“The Insult” takes a small incident and uses it to throw audiences right into the experience of contemporary Lebanon. As if in passing, it gives us an education into a country’s history, its fault lines and its people.It’s a strange thing. If you were to take a poll and ask most American moviegoers if they wanted to see a movie all about modern Lebanon, a small minority would say yes. But if you forced those same people to sit through a screening of “The Insult,” the vast majority would thank you. My point: Chances are you would like to see this movie, even if you don’t yet know it.The story spirals out from a couple of minor encounters. There’s a construction crew going around doing repairs and making small improvements. The crew manager, Yasser (Kamel El Basha), knocks on the door of one of the residents, asking if he could repair a drainage pipe. That resident, a man named Tony (Adel Karam), becomes nasty and abusive. The insult, of the title, comes when Yasser uses foul language in response.Now it’s likely that, for a Lebanese audience, the source of the tension between the two men would be obvious. Tony is a Lebanese Christian, and he recognizes that Yasser is Palestinian just on the basis of his accent. But the movie works just as well for this to linger for a few minutes as a mystery. An effort to bring about a rapprochement between the two men fails, when Tony tells Yasser that he wishes that Israeli General Ariel Sharon would have killed all the Palestinians. So Yasser punches him.With this, the stage is set for a courtroom drama, in which each man is suing the other. The offenses, on both sides, are relatively small; but the lawyers get involved, and each side sees the case as a way of giving voice to larger grievances. From here, the stakes escalate.“The Insult,” nominated this week for an Oscar as best foreign film, was directed and co-written by Ziad Doueiri, who is a Lebanese Muslim, in partnership with co-writer Joelle Touma, a Lebanese Christian, who is also Doueiri’s ex-wife. The film takes the form of a courtroom drama to explore the grievances on all sides of modern Lebanese life. The mission isn’t to choose who is right and who is wrong, but rather to emphasize that everyone has scars and genuine reasons to be enraged. The movie also suggests that Lebanon might have benefited from something like the Truth and Reconciliation process that was instituted in South Africa after the end of apartheid.The writing is subtle and refreshingly without sentimentality — sentimentality being a common flaw in Middle Eastern cinema. In a film in which characters must, in a sense, stand for entire peoples, the danger is that the characters will lack individuality, that they’ll become archetypes or, worse, cliches.That’s doesn’t happen here. The performance of Adel Karam is especially striking, playing Tony as a powerful man who goes through life enraged. Karam never tries to soften that, but he illuminates it.It’s a fascinating job of acting, in that Karam seems to be opening up his soul even as he’s not giving an inch.
2////The first 15 minutes of “Mom and Dad” establish their teenage daughter, Carly, as unbearable. She steals from her parents, and lies, and when her long-suffering mother (Selma Blair) bemoans the fact that they are no longer “best friends,” the daughter lashes out and says that it’s not her fault that Mom has no life.The movie gets us to the point that we’d willingly see the mother strangle the daughter, precisely as the movie reveals that that is, sort of, the idea. In a plot choice worthy of M. Night Shyamalan, some virus or mass psychosis suddenly seizes parents everywhere, and they develop an irresistible impulse to murder their children. For the record, the neighbors’ kids are safe. So are grandchildren and nieces and nephews, but it is absolute open season on direct offspring.So that’s some kind of an idea for a movie. But it’s a kind of lonely hearts idea: It needs another idea. That one idea isn’t enough to sustain an entire movie. Left alone, it’s just a gimmick. It calls out for innovations and surprises of plot; and it needs something else undergirding it, something that might be called, for lack of a better word, a point.Instead, “Mom and Dad” just dines out on that one quirky turn: Parents want to kill their kids, get it? Isn’t that weird? Isn’t that hilarious? Isn’t that socially interesting? Doesn’t that tap some deep reservoir of parental resentment? And ... isn’t that weird? Isn’t that hilarious? ... Increasingly, the answer to each of these questions becomes no.Nicolas Cage plays the father, and although it’s nice to see him acting like a maniac — that’s his true cinematic calling, not going around in action movies like James Stewart on steroids — the material is so bad that his presence is a distraction. Instead of marveling at the spectacle of a father trying to break a door so he can kill his kids, we marvel at this Academy Award- winning actor starring in a movie that’s so far beneath him that it’s amazing he didn’t need a microscope just to read the script.Written and directed by Brian Taylor — all too often the best and the worst films are the unalloyed products of a single consciousness — “Mom and Dad” contracts precisely at the point where it should expand. After introducing a situation that’s global, maybe international, Taylor constricts the action to a single house and a single family. In a way, that contraction was itself the sign of an infertile idea. It inspired, in the filmmaker, a mental retreat to solidity, defined parameters and certitude and away from madness, impulse and possibility.Or to put it another way, the movie’s one and only idea renders itself boring, with still half the movie left for the audience to endure.
5////So things really aren’t going well, not one bit. The apocalypse has more or less happened — or worse, it’s in the process of happening. There’s a virus going around, and three-quarters of the people on Earth are infected. Most cities are destroyed.Oh, yes, and about that virus? It turns people into zombies — not literally, in a textbook definition sense, but zombie-like: A lust for flesh, poor dental hygiene, a tendency to attack in packs, and to walk funny, have jerky movements and to show a certain exuberance in destruction. This is the world of “Maze Runner: The Death Cure,” the third installment in the “Maze Runner” trilogy, a kind of destitute man’s impoverished cousin’s answer to the “Divergent” series.The first scene sets the tone, with its subtle blend of energy and fabulous stupidity. A team of young rebels interrupts a government transport. Apparently, one of their group, a young man named Minho (Ki Hong Lee), has been captured and is being taken to the last remaining city. And so, in a fairly exciting sequence — albeit one that depends on not a single government agent being able to shoot straight — the rebels disengage Minho’s train car and, using a hooked cable and an airplane, lift it into the sky and transport it to their base.Just one problem: They steal the wrong train car. Oops.Though “Maze Runner: The Death Cure” lasts a full 142 minutes — every one of which, having spent, you can never get back — the situation it describes is a fairly simple one. The non-zombie contingent of the human race is dying out, and the remaining authorities are desperate to find someone whose blood is naturally resistant to the contagion. So they are kidnapping likely candidates and bringing them to the city center for experiments in the hope of creating a vaccine. That entire train transport, for example, was full of young people being forcibly brought to the city for experimentation.Young hero, Thomas, embarks on a mission to find a cure to a deadly disease known as the "Flare". Starring Kaya Scodelario, Dylan O'Brien, Walton Goggins, Nathalie Emmanuel and more. This is the first trailer for 'Maze Runner: The Death Cure' in HD. Check it out.You’d think that screening people for the antivirus would be a pretty straightforward process, but no. Instead, for reasons that are never explained, each person is tortured, strapped into a machine and forced to endure horrible and terrifying hallucinations. Understandably, the rebels want to rescue these young people from state-sponsored torture.All this creates a rather odd situation for an action movie, in that neither side has a monopoly on virtue. The authorities want to barricade themselves against the zombies, but that’s not so different from what the rebels want, to establish a cozy little colony of people immune or uninfected. Also, at least the government is looking for a cure. The rebels are trying to disrupt the research.Yet there’s really little point in investing more thought in this movie than the filmmakers, is there? “Maze Runner: The Death Cure” was not intended as something to contemplate, but as a moment-by-moment proposition, and scene by scene, it’s not horrible. It’s not even boring. Led by a reasonably engaging cast — Dylan O’Brien as the rebel leader, Kaya Scodelario as a young researcher — this third installment gently swings from scenes that are mildly disappointing to others that are mildly diverting.That doesn’t constitute a recommendation, but rather expresses just a certain relief that it could have been worse. Not much worse, but worse.
2////So this is how it works: In the fall, movies are intended to be good and usually are. In the summer, movies are intended to be bad but profitable, and they’re usually both. But in January and February, we get the special season. That’s when the movies are intended to be great but are horrible.But not normal horrible. We’re talking seven-headed horrible, disaster-site horrible, a movie like, for example, “Den of Thieves,” which kicks off the 2018 winter season in style. Clocking in at two hours and 20 minutes, it seems intended to have been a crime epic in the vein of Michael Mann’s “Heat,” about two men of talent and spirit who happen to be on opposite sides of the law. And it’s sort of like that, if you can imagine a Michael Mann picture that has been set on fire and dropped from an airplane.First-time director Christian Gudegast also wrote the film, and you can tell, in the sense that there was clearly no one there to look at the script and say, “Come on.” Gerard Butler, as wild-man detective Flanagan, shows up in the first scene looking like he slept in his clothes, with his hair a mess and blotches on his face, as if he just got back from auditioning to play Steve Bannon. There has been a violent robbery of an armored truck. But here’s the weird part: The armored truck was empty.In a normal crime movie, there would be an investigation to discover the perpetrators. Not here. Flanagan stands in front of a whiteboard and announces that it must be Merriman (Pablo Schreiber) and his gang. Merriman, the criminal genius. And the empty truck must be part of some bigger master plan.Flanagan is so sure he knows who did it that he shows up that evening at a nightclub where serious crimes are plotted. Apparently, crooks go to this one spot in Los Angeles to make it easier to get caught. There Flanagan intuits immediately that the bartender, Donnie (O’Shea Jackson Jr.), must be part of Merriman’s gang. This detective is amazing. It’s almost as if the screenwriter is helping him.But hey, let’s stop here. This is too convoluted, too crazy, too absurd to make any linear sense of. Better to concentrate on a handful of random absurdities.For example, after cultivating a person on the inside of Merriman’s organization, Flanagan intentionally blows his cover. Why? Wrong question.Midway through the movie, the cop already knows where the villain is — he is looking right at him — but he doesn’t make an arrest. Instead the movie takes a detour, in which the detective makes a point of having sex with the bad guy’s wife.This is followed by another scene, in which the villain thanks his wife for having sex with the detective. It was all part of a master plan, see? But the plan is never revealed.Throughout, the movie indulges in long scenes of conversation between Flanagan and minor characters. In the beginning, you think, well, maybe that minor character will become important later. But no, “Den of Thieves” is just out of control.Ultimately, the movie’s main problem is that it’s about a heist, but it’s also about a cop trying to prevent the heist. That’s a tension that’s tough to pull off. If you’re rooting for both things to happen, that could be interesting. That might work if the audience had some investment in the characters, but this isn’t Al Pacino going up against Robert De Niro. This is a slob versus a psychopath, and it’s a matter of indifference who succeeds and who fails. 
8////Maybe you think you had the worst 2016 election night party in America — you know, the one that ended early. But no, that distinction belongs to then-U.N. Ambassador Samantha Power, as evidenced in the new documentary “The Final Year,” about foreign policy during President Barack Obama’s last year in office.Power decided that it would be really fun if she invited every woman representing a country in the United Nations, nearly 40 of them. They came, and so did Madeleine Albright, the first woman to serve as secretary of state. To top it off, Power even had Gloria Steinem in attendance. After all, if you’re going to celebrate a woman’s cracking the highest and hardest of glass ceilings, who better to have on the couch sitting next to you but one of the premier feminists of the past half century?Think of it: Watching Hillary Clinton’s election with Gloria Steinem. That would be as glorious and appropriate as going out to vote for the first time in 1920 with Elizabeth Cady Stanton and Susan B. Anthony! Except, wait, Stanton and Anthony were both dead in 1920 and never saw the fruition of their life’s work. And so it has always been in American history: Feminism has never been a career path for those looking for instant gratification, or anything close to it.But anyway. There they all are, all these prominent women, gathered around the television, smiling in anticipation. And at first, things are going well. Power gives the thumbs-up to the cameras. But then Florida starts to look a little funny, and then North Carolina. And then there’s an odd smell coming off of Ohio, followed by some very puzzling vibrations in Pennsylvania. Next thing, some dreaded, awful TV person is standing by a blue and red map of Wisconsin and saying unsettling things. And by this time, of course, the room is half empty.The scene emphasizes the essential challenge of “The Final Year” in its quest to find an audience. People who don’t like Obama won’t want to see it, because they won’t want to spend 90 minutes watching Obama and Obama’s administration. And as for people who like Obama . . . well, they might not want to spend 90 minutes getting seriously depressed.Directed by Greg Barker, “The Final Year” was intended as a fly-on-the-wall documentary, in the great tradition of Robert Drew’s John F. Kennedy documentaries, tracing the mechanics of the Obama administration’s Middle East policy. We see Power, Secretary of State John Kerry and deputy national security adviser Ben Rhodes, among others, working on initiatives with regard to Syria and Iran, while battling the Russian Federation in the United Nations.But that’s not what we’re thinking about as we watch. Rather the experience of this movie is like being transported by film to southern Italy in early A.D. 79, to see a vigorous discussion as to whether to build the new City Hall in Pompeii or Herculaneum. You don’t even wish you could go back and tell them that the volcano next door will soon render the conversation moot. It’s all too depressing, to see these intelligent, concerned public servants while knowing who has since replaced them.Midway through the documentary, a foreign diplomat asks Rhodes if he thinks it’s possible that Donald Trump will get elected president. A smirk forms on Rhodes’ face — the same smirk I felt on my own face many times when I traveled in Europe that year — as he says, no way. Forget it. Never happen. Don’t even think about it.Later, in the immediate aftermath of the election, the normally loquacious Rhodes is asked for a comment, and he literally goes about 30 or 40 seconds, struggling to put two or three words together. Finally, he gives up.So “The Final Year” is that kind of experience. It is, for what it’s worth, a good documentary, though I imagine its true worth and true nature can only be revealed in time. At the starting gate of 2018, we can have no idea how this film will be perceived in 10 years, and maybe we don’t want to know. Then again, maybe we do.
5////A remarkable story inspired “12 Strong,” but the remarkable story actually told by “12 Strong” is a different remarkable story. Maybe the story is slightly different, and maybe it’s a lot different, but one thing is for sure — it happens to different characters.For a movie like this, an inspirational historical drama, this is a bit of a problem, because half the satisfaction comes from knowing (or believing) that everything on screen is at least grounded in fact. But in “12 Strong,” it’s all dramatized. Chris Hemsworth plays a character based on a real person, but the other American soldiers are fictional, which means the incidents and the details of the battles are fictional, too.At least this much is true: In the early days of the Afghanistan War, with the World Trade Center wreckage still smoldering in downtown Manhattan, a group of 12 Special Forces guys joined with a horseback unit of the Northern Alliance, led by Gen. Abdul Dostum. Vastly outnumbered, they still sent the Taliban and al Qaeda into retreat. This story is the subject of the book, “Horse Soldiers,” by Doug Stanton, which formed the basis of the film.Hemsworth is Nelson, a captain newly transferred to desk duty, when the terrorist attacks of 9/11 take place. He immediately asks to go into combat, forms a team of equally hearty soldiers, and lands what his superiors think is next-door to a suicide mission. Like him, his men can’t wait to get into the action. These are seriously tough guys.The logistics of the battle scenes have some interest, in that two sides are oddly matched. The Americans and the Northern Alliance fighters just have guns, while the Taliban and al Qaeda have guns, rocket launchers and tanks. However, the Americans also have planes in the sky that can drop missiles. These are the most powerful weapons, capable of inflicting tremendous damage, but they’re blunt instruments that have a way of missing entire armies. So lots of fighting has to be done on the ground.Chris Hemsworth is, as always, appealing, and Michael Shannon, as the radio operator, plays a nice guy for once, and it suits him. Best of all is Navid Negahban (Abu Nazir on “Homeland) as the real-life character Gen. Dostum, presented here as a philosopher-warrior, prone to pronouncements such as “Your mission will fail because you fear death.”But the movie is long, too long at 130 minutes, and the battle scenes are difficult to follow. This may sound like a ridiculous complaint, but the problem is complicated by the fact that neither the Northern Alliance nor the Taliban wore uniforms. Combine that with quick cutting, and just about the only time you can be absolutely sure which side you’re looking at is if someone is driving a tank or detonating a suicide vest.Gradually, the sameness and the impenetrability of the scenes wear the audience down. And once you know that you’re exerting all this effortful attention to follow battle scenes that probably didn’t happen, the whole enterprise hardly seems worth the trouble. It also doesn’t help that the Afghanistan conflict doesn’t feel like history yet, nor quite like a victory yet. So it’s difficult to get into the celebratory spirit.Still it might be enough that “12 Strong” makes you feel good that the United States still produces guys like this. Too bad we didn’t get to know about the real guys and their actual story.
5////“Film Stars Don’t Die in Liverpool” tells the story of the last years of glamour star Gloria Grahame, a worthy subject; but the movie faces two challenges that are very hard to get around.The first is that a good third or more of the movie depicts Grahame in 1981, when she was dying, and sickness has a way of making everyone the same. She’s in bed, she’s weak, she’s sleeping. Sometimes she’s in pain. Sometimes she’s eating. Sometimes she’s weary and appreciative. Sometimes she’s in a lonely place that no one can penetrate. But these states would be the same for virtually anyone who dies of natural causes, whether it’s George Washington, Attila the Hun or Madame Curie.A person’s claim to distinction is in the way they are in life; and in the case of Grahame, she was quite a character — a wild woman from start to finish. (One example: Director Nicholas Ray divorced her when he found her in bed with his 13-year-old son. Ten years later, she married the stepson.) And this brings us to the second and even more insurmountable obstacle. There’s only one actress who could have made complete sense of Gloria Grahame’s story, and that’s Grahame herself.The movie is based on the book of the same name, by Peter Turner, who was Grahame’s lover in the last years of her life. They meet in England, when she is 54 and he is 26, when she asks to practice disco dancing with him, and you know how that goes: What happens on the dance floor rarely stays on the dance floor. To play Grahame, Annette Bening alters her usual manner and talks in Grahame’s breathy, girlish way. She does it well, but not so well that it ever seems entirely natural to her.Indeed, one might say that “Film Stars Don’t Die in Liverpool” makes emotional sense only to the extent that viewers can consciously force themselves to accept certain things that they would not accept spontaneously. Among these are basic plot points: Why would Gloria/Bening be so attracted to this young man so much as to invest in a relationship? And why would he be so intensely attracted to this former film star more than twice his age? In the playing, the relationship is like a premise inhabited by good actors, rather than something with an authentic visceral charge.This is one case where watching some of another movie might help. “Chilly Scenes of Winter” (1979) was made right at the time Grahame was meeting Turner. If you watch a few scenes of Grahame in this, you’ll understand everything. At 54, Grahame seemed nutty and anarchic, as if something about her refused to mature. She wasn’t alert and radiantly curious, in the way that Bening is in her essence, but rather like someone who’d taken a nap for 30 years and had woken up, in every sense but chronologically, still 25.So it probably seemed oddly appropriate when Grahame told Turner that she wanted to appear in “Romeo and Juliet,” not as the Nurse or Lady Capulet, but as Juliet. It probably didn’t seem pathetic or delusional, but reasonable within the emotional universe that surrounded her. But when Bening tells this to Jamie Bell, who plays Turner, it’s simply a weird note.Here and there, particularly in flashback, Bening gets a scene or a moment to invest in and shine, but for truly a surprising length of time, Bening plays a woman who is asleep, literally. Apparently, Grahame, in some kind of denial about her condition, insisted on staying with her young lover’s family. So a good deal of the film is about the dynamic of these working-class English people with an Oscar-winning movie star in the upstairs bedroom.Julie Walters, as the mother, is engaging as always; and director Patrick McGuigan attempts to liven things up with imaginative camera work, but there is no escaping the essential flaccidity of the story. Bening does a whole lot of dying here — it almost never stops. By the end, there’s not a dry eye on the screen, and not a wet eye in the audience.
8////Liam Neeson’s action movies have a built-in appeal, whether good (“Taken,” “Run All Night”) or only so-so (“Taken 3”), but “The Commuter” is securely in the good category. It weds all the winning aspects of the Neeson formula to a ticking-clock plot, full of tense moments and gripping sequences.The big innovation of the Neeson formula — the eureka discovery of “Taken” — is that action can work in a big way when presented as a traditional rags to riches story: Guy starts off down, mistreated, misunderstood. Then there’s a horrible crisis, and he rises to it. He finds complete redemption. Everyone understands that this is one heck of a man.Here’s what’s interesting about this: Other action movies try to galvanize audience interest by making you hate the bad guy. Much is done at the start of such movies to create antipathy and anxiety. But in the Neeson formula, the villains can be vague. We just want Neeson to win because he deserves it, because we know how much he needs it, and because — like all of us — he’s had to put up with plenty and is entitled to a little peace, for crying out loud.And so, at the start of “The Commuter,” they lay it on thick: We see him getting up every morning at 6 a.m., day in and day out, in the summer and the winter. We see him riding the commuter train, into and out of New York City. He and his wife (Elizabeth McGovern) worry about the kid’s tuition. Oh, and by the way, you remember that 2008 recession? He lost everything. Every last penny. Of course, he did. This is Liam Neeson. He can’t lose a quarter of his savings, or half. He had to get wiped out.So one day he goes to work at his job at the insurance agency, and we see what a fine salesman he is, with a genuine concern for his customers. It’s just another day of being a decent person, playing by the rules. And then the boss calls him in, and guess what? They’re laying him off. So he’s 60, has two mortgages, a kid about to start college, and now he’s unemployed.This set-up takes maybe 10 minutes of screen time, and even though it couldn’t be more obvious and manipulative, it’s brilliant. First it’s telling the audience, “This guy is you, or could be you, or your father, or your husband.” Second, this kind of fellow — a humble man of hidden gifts, trying to do the right thing, is perfectly suited to Neeson’s air of put-upon probity. We feel sorry for him, but we also want him to get mad. Because when he gets mad ...So there he is on the train back to the suburbs, pink slip in hand, when a beautiful, mystery woman (Vera Farmiga) sits across from him with a proposition: For $25,000 now and $75,000 later, all he has to do is find someone on the train named “Prynne” and attach a tracking device to this person’s bag. That’s $100,000 — a lot of money to a guy whose mortgage check might bounce, and that’s this month’s mortgage, from the days when he still had a job.Need it be said that things get complicated? That there’s no such thing as an easy 100 grand? We know this going in, but what’s terrific about “The Commuter” is all the ways that it gets complicated. First he’s looking for a bag. Soon he’s firing shots inside the train cabin and yelling, “They’re going to kill my family!” Nobody comes unglued better than Neeson, and no one stays more focused and more intense even as the glue is coming loose. And then there is at least one spectacular action sequence, but you can discover that in the moment.It doesn’t matter that, by the end, most viewers would be hard pressed to pass a quiz about the specifics of the story. Nor should it especially concern us that this movie is very close to a commuter-train remake of Neeson’s “Non-Stop” (2014), set on an airplane. This is a winning formula, and if the ocean liner version of this movie were to open next week, I’d be happy to see it. 
8////Paul Thomas Anderson is getting there. He is a great director of scenes, not of movies, but in “Phantom Thread” he has devised a film that hangs in from start to finish, his first since “Boogie Nights.” His strengths and weaknesses are as apparent as ever, but here his strengths are stronger and his weaknesses obscured. The result is not just a film to wrestle with and talk about, but enjoy.There is no director better at starting a film, and no director of commensurate talent who has been worse at ending one. And “Phantom Thread” follows that pattern, in the sense that its opening scenes are brilliant, and its closing is barely effective — not quite frogs raining from the sky (“Magnolia”), not quite someone drinking someone’s milkshake (“There Will Be Blood”), but gimmicky and unconvincing.However, this time the proportions are right. The central relationship — between a self-centered, obsessive dress designer (Daniel Day-Lewis) and his much younger lover, Alma (Vicky Krieps) — remains fascinating throughout, and the ending is, at least, efficient. After a little over two hours, Anderson finds a way to stop the train while his audience is still on board.“Phantom Thread” tells a story of obsessive creativity and how it can destroy everything in its path, when combined with the absolute license of great success. Reynolds (Lewis) is a top designer in 1950s London, who never stops working. We see him, in the first scene, sketching at breakfast and being berated by his latest girlfriend that he never pays attention to her. It hardly needs to be said that that’s the last time we see that girlfriend.What the women in his life don’t realize is that his relationships are not a relief from his work, or the point of his work. They function to augment his work, either to inspire him (in the beginning) or at least to keep the sex side of his existence from becoming a nagging distraction. We know all this about him, really, from the first scene — a marvel of economy from both Anderson and Day-Lewis. Thus, we stand warned, a couple of minutes later, when we see Reynolds working his charm on the young Alma, who becomes his next lover/victim/inspiration.Whoever thought that watching Daniel Day-Lewis make a dress could be so interesting? He seems to take in every inch of both the dress and the woman underneath it with a quality of knowing appreciation, accented by hints of worry and self-criticism. Will he be able to do it again? If he gets an idea, will he get the necessary next idea, and the one after? On their first night together, after rolling out a few well-practiced head games — “If this is a staring contest, I’ll win,” she says in response — he designs a dress for her. The sex can come later, an afterthought. This is the real intimacy.Also present for this intimacy is the designer’s sister (Lesley Manville), who runs the business and serves as a kind of Frau Blucher to the designer’s Dr. Frankenstein. The sister records Alma’s measurements as the designer calls them out, and everything in her manner suggests that this is all part of a pattern. First the dress, then the relationship, then the demands and the neediness. When it’s time for the latest girlfriend to go, it’s always the designer’s sister who breaks the news and makes sure that the young woman and her luggage are sent packing.But Alma has a lot of spine. She is young, naive and powerless, but she seems to know this man she’s involved with, and she’s a quick learner. She wants to assert herself into the center of Reynolds’ life, and the question of the movie — as well as its struggle and its drama — turns on that effort. Throughout, we don’t know if we’re seeing the familiar pattern play out, or if we’re about to witness something new.Supposedly, this is Daniel Day-Lewis’ last film, but sometimes it’s necessary to believe you’re retiring just to feel fresh in one’s work. (He is only 60 and surely has at least two or three of these retirements still ahead of him.) Reynolds is one of his best roles, which he plays with a mix of hardness and monumental selfishness, combined with an almost plaintive need to keep coming back to his own talent, to this thing that nourishes and devours him. For him, life is simple, a matter of just doing one thing. But to live that way can easily be the path to no life at all and, even more to be feared, artistic sterility.Like Alma is to Reynolds, Krieps doesn’t try to keep up with Day-Lewis. She watches him intently and finds her openings. She waits for her moments. Guided by Anderson, this is performance as rope-a-dope, and by the end, Krieps has become as compelling as her co-star, something nearly impossible. 
8////As it is with “The Post,” so it is with many Steven Spielberg movies. We sit there, a little interested, a little bit detached, thinking, well, this is OK, nothing special, but perfectly fine. And then — who knows how he does it? — the camera moves in on a face, the soundtrack swells, and suddenly half the crowd has tears in their eyes, and you’re one of them.In “The Post,” the moment comes when the political columnist Meg Greenfield (Carrie Coon) gets word of a Supreme Court decision concerning a newspaper’s right to publish material gleaned from whistle-blowers. She holds the phone and repeats to her colleagues the decision of Justice Hugo Black: that America’s founders affirmed freedom of the press “to serve the governed, not the governors.” And if someone could put a mirror in front of your face as you watch this, you’d be surprised at your own transport and wonder.Spielberg is so good at this sort of thing that the question raises itself: Is he feeling it, too, or is he just a master manipulator? In a way, the question is immaterial — the movie is the movie, however it’s made — and yet it would be nice to know if we’re all just that easy.Spielberg crafts another moment, almost as effective. Publisher Katharine Graham leaves the courthouse after testifying on behalf of her newspaper, and a phalanx of young women watches her walk down the steps, in speechless awe. Did it really happen that way? Probably not. Is the scene so obvious that the ghost of Frank Capra himself would call it corny? Oh yes. But Spielberg knows something about movies, and that tableau, obvious though it may be, is lovely.It also hammers home the feminist nature of this real-life journalism tale. “The Post” is set in 1971 and deals with the Washington Post’s decision to publish the Pentagon Papers, a leaked secret report proving that just about everything presidential administrations had said about the Vietnam War was a lie. By this time the New York Times had run some stories, but they’d been silenced by a court injunction. Now it was up to Graham whether to risk violating the court order by publishing the papers in the Post.As played by Meryl Streep, Graham is a woman from an earlier time who became the boss only because her husband died. The newspaper, owned by her father, was in a sense part of her dowry — and she took it for granted that her husband should be in charge. Now that it’s all hers, she has to push through her own insecurities and the stridency and condescension of her board of directors in order to find herself. “The Post” is a rare coming-of-age film, in that it’s about a woman’s coming of age in her mid-50s. Yet for middle-aged women of that second-wave feminist era, this was not an unusual phenomenon.“The Post” is on safe ground when it focuses on Streep as Graham — tentative, slightly affected, but growing by the day — and with Graham’s relationship with her gruff, hotshot editor, Ben Bradlee, played by Tom Hanks, against type but winningly. The movie’s challenge is the journalism story, which is not as clear-cut as Watergate and is therefore harder to dramatize.In fact, as a story, the whole Pentagon Papers saga has everything against it. The revelations were about the Eisenhower, Kennedy and Johnson administrations, but Nixon was now president. The papers didn’t represent one story, but a number of stories. And the stories themselves were complex, not as simple as dirty tricks, a break-in and a cover-up — or, as in “Spotlight,” priests molesting boys. Also, the reporters didn’t have to dig for the story. It landed on their lap, thousands of undigested pages, which they had to read.These challenges can’t completely be overcome, no matter how many times they crank up the John Williams score, and so the movie sags in the middle. Still, when Spielberg has to bring it home, he does. If the intention was to send audiences out feeling inspired about journalism and its function in a republic, consider that mission accomplished.Finally, it hardly needs to be said, and yet it needs to be acknowledged, that everyone connected with the film was thinking about the story in terms of today’s events. “The Post” was filmed in a hurry — principal photography began at the end of May — with the intention of celebrating an institution and a profession under constant attack by the present administration. As such, “The Post” is not just a pretty good Spielberg picture, but mainstream Hollywood’s first response to life in the Trump era — the trickle before the flood.
2////“Happy End” is the latest from Michael Haneke, an uncompromising filmmaker whose work is sometimes brilliant and sometimes hard to watch — and sometimes both, but not this time. “Happy End” is just hard to watch.It’s a movie that seems to have been made with little regard for the fact that other human beings will have to sit through it. True, to his credit, Haneke does point his camera in the direction of the actors, but that’s his last concession to convention. Haneke, who also wrote the screenplay, takes material that might have been dramatic, and deliberately renders it stultifying, filming irrelevant scenes while skipping over any moment that might possibly interest somebody.It’s the story of a wealthy industrialist family in the Normandy region of France. Dad (Jean-Louis Trintignant) is 85 and painfully aware that he is slipping into dementia. His daughter, Anne (Isabelle Huppert), is running the company but is being undermined by her drunken son, Pierre (Franz Rogowski), who may be responsible for a workplace accident resulting in the death of a worker.Meanwhile, one of the grandchildren, little darling Eve (Fantine Harduin), has just poisoned her mother, although no one knows it. Everyone thinks that Eve is a sweet little girl grieving over Mom’s irreversible coma.So the point is, there is stuff going on here, more than enough to fill a 107-minute movie. Oh, but to make something entertaining out of all this, well, that would be socially irresponsible, or artistically ordinary, wouldn’t it? So we never see Mom getting poisoned, for example, but we do see little Eve packing a suitcase. Just packing. And packing some more. Then zipping up the suitcase. Then walking out of the room.Nor do we see the old man attempt suicide in his car. That would be cheap. That would be typical. That might even, horror of horrors, be interesting to watch. Instead, we see him later, in a wheelchair, rolling down the street. He rolls down one block, then he wheels himself down another. And another. At the end of the street, he has a conversation with several men, but we don’t hear it. We have no idea what he’s saying.Are you still there? The boring nature of this movie is having an impact on the review, so let’s just put it this way: It is actually possible to fall asleep during a shot, have an entire dream and wake up to find the same shot still going on. No, really, it’s easy. I’ve tried it.At one point, the old man says, “Now I’m a captive of this damn chair with no hope of escape” — anticipating exactly how audiences will feel while watching the movie.Here’s the shame of it. Trintignant is a great actor, and his depiction of dementia, in that particular middle stage where the consciousness and intelligence are still there but the memory and awareness are going, is haunting and precise. And Isabelle Huppert is quite interesting, or could have been, as the publicly adept businesswoman dealing with multiple problems simultaneously. Even Fantine Harduin, as the bantam Borgia, suggests a tumultuous, twisted inner life.Yet having creating these fascinating characters , and cast his film with the best possible actors, Haneke gives them nothing to play. They just arrive on screen and exist. It’s not enough. It’s not drama. It’s not cinema. It’s an endurance test, and there’s no reason that anyone should take it.
2////Somebody has been watching lots of Westerns: The sky that begins a few feet off the ground. The red rock. The courage. The silence. The bad food. The people wearing the same clothes forever. And nobody has any luggage.Somebody has been loving Westerns, too, but loving them perhaps a little too much. Excessive reverence has a way of lengthening pauses between lines of dialogue, and sometimes between words. Writer-director Scott Cooper invests every last moment in “Hostiles,” even minor encounters between minor characters, with solemnity. This is not garden-variety seriousness we’re talking about, but a deep gravity and earnestness that denies even the possibility of humor’s existence.This makes “Hostiles” something of a slog, but a movie-literate slog containing some impressive scenes. Thus, we get Rosamund Pike as a nice woman, living in the middle of nowhere, who is home-schooling her daughters one day, when her husband runs in and says that the Comanches are about to attack them. Them, personally. There’s no village, just one little house. What follows is a slaughter, the kind of bloodshed that John Ford could never show back in the day. It’s shocking and takes you straight into the terror of living in that particular place and time.Meanwhile, over at the nearby government fort, Capt. Blocker (Christian Bale), a veteran Indian fighter, is assigned to take a small team of soldiers and escort an ailing Cheyenne Indian chief, Yellow Hawk (Wes Studi), back to his homeland in Montana. Blocker doesn’t like Indians all that much, and Yellow Hawk isn’t a big fan of the white settlers. But they’re all stuck together, and guess who they run into on their journey? Rosalie (Pike), a traumatized woman who has just witnessed the murder of her husband, two daughters and an infant baby.That’s the set-up of “Hostiles,” and the rest of the movie is about the struggle to make Montana, in the face of internal division and possible Comanche attack. Apparently being home on the range, in those days, amounted to long, long stretches of nothing happening, interspersed with brief spasms of violence and horror.One could say Cooper takes his time, but that would be understating the situation. Better to say that Cooper makes Liv Ullmann look like Michael Bay. Have you ever seen a movie directed by Liv Ullmann? If it’s subtitled, you can watch it on fast forward and not miss a single nuance. Cooper is even slower than that. Characters think before they talk. They think a long time. They think before they ask a cliched question — such as: How did you feel the first time you killed somebody? And then they think forever before answering: Don’t worry, you’ll get used to it.There’s a thin line between depicting and inflicting misery, and “Hostiles” crosses the line with its dull characters, its almost-endless tedium and its nihilistic violence. The attempt seems to be to update the Western genre by respecting the traditions while emphasizing, in a modern way, the hardships and the racial conflicts. But the audience shares those hardships, while experiencing none of the poetry or grandeur that other Westerns often provide.Indeed, there’s such overkill on the misery that when Pike starts shrieking in grief, bewailing the slaughter of her two daughters and infant child, you may find a little devil land on your shoulder with a smirk on its face. There’s only so much pawing at the earth that an actress can do before digging through to the other side, where tragedy meets comedy.
10////“All in the Money in the World” was in the news before it was in the theaters because of a reshoot to replace Kevin Spacey with Christopher Plummer following the sexual allegations against Spacey this fall. His role was that of billionaire J. Paul Getty, and when I read that, I assumed that Getty couldn’t be that large a part. Pivotal, maybe. Colorful, for sure, but not something occupying much actual screen time.Well, it turns out that J. Paul Getty is all over “All the Money in the World.” He is the second or third lead and is in multiple scenes, which means that easily 30 percent of the film had to be completely reshot. This represents a remarkable and seamless technical achievement, as well as an impressive artistic achievement for director Ridley Scott and his cast. Plummer delivers brilliance in what had to be record time, and every person sharing a scene with Plummer — Michelle Williams and Mark Wahlberg, in particular — comes in fresh and spontaneous, responding anew to another actor’s completely different energy.The film tells the story of the notorious 1973 kidnapping of J. Paul Getty III, the 16-year-old grandson of the richest man in the world. The kidnapping was notorious for two reasons, one best discovered in the watching, and the other because the senior Getty, despite his wealth, was a tightwad who wouldn’t pay the ransom. He was so cheap he laundered his own shirts and had a pay phone installed in the house in case his guests wanted to make calls. So forget about forking over $17 million.Someday, on some Blu-ray in the future, we might get to see how Spacey approached the role, but Plummer does something it’s hard to imagine anyone topping. He doesn’t play active malevolence, but a mental disorder. He plays someone with a narrow, pinched view of existence, but one that, in his estimation, has been emphatically confirmed by fabulous success. So he goes around with a smirky glow, convinced that everyone wants what he has and amused that no one is going to get it.FOX 5's Kevin McCarthy spoke with Mark Wahlberg and Michelle Williams, stars of the new film, 'All The Money In The World.'As such, he is not a villain. He’s just beyond the reach of other values. Human emotion touches him, but in muted form. If someone, such as his security man (Wahlberg), makes an appeal to some higher consideration, he assumes it’s a ploy, or he looks for the hidden money angle. He really thinks everyone is as selfish and mercenary as he is, but because everyone is at least a little selfish and mercenary, he keeps finding evidence that he’s right. Plummer conveys all this with very little, a look, a smile, a subtle emphasis.This brings him into conflict with his former daughter-in-law, Abigail Harris Getty, the kidnapped boy’s mother, played impeccably by Williams. The kidnappers direct their ransom demands to the mother, naturally assuming that, because she’s a Getty, she’s loaded. She tells them that she’s not, and they tell her to get it from the old man. Sure, why not? And how about some blood from a stone while she’s at it?“All the Money in the World” is probably unique among kidnap sagas in that the primary conflict isn’t between the victim and the kidnappers, or the mother and the kidnappers, but between Abigail and her former father-in-law. Abigail is essentially powerless, but the script and Williams keep her active, making appeals to the implacable billionaire and negotiating with the kidnappers for less ransom and more time.Williams adopts the particular speaking pattern of Abigail Getty, the forward placement, the slight sibilance and the hints of good breeding. This wasn’t a necessary choice, but it works well to fill in the character. The role demands that Williams remain at a pitch of emotion throughout and then top even that, as when she goes to identify her son’s body, and it turns out to be someone else, or she picks up the phone, and it’s her kidnapped son on the line.Williams always plays the unexpected. She doesn’t feel the emotion and then express it. She feels and expresses it simultaneously, always while doing some other third thing. She knows what Al Pacino knew when he played that scene in “The Godfather” when Michael’s wife blows up in her car. When the situation is that urgent, there’s no split second for realization to register on a face. At that level of intense crisis, emotion and action are one.“All the Money in the World” doesn’t transcend its genre, in the sense of being more than it is, a fascinating thriller. But it’s as realized a thriller as you are likely to find, not only in the precision of its performances, but in its evocative use of location (Rome, London), its period detail (especially Williams’ clothing) and the tension of the younger Getty’s months-long captivity.It would be an unusual and somewhat harrowing experience to put oneself through on Christmas Day, but like all movies of this quality, it gives back more than it takes.
2////Even before it completely falls apart, even before it begins to seem as though it were being made up on the spot, “Downsizing” is strangely unlovable. It’s a place we don’t want to visit, a world we don’t want to inhabit. Watching it feels like work.Co-written and directed by Alexander Payne, the movie is an intelligent person’s response to the environmental and economic anxieties plaguing the modern world. Dumb sci-fi movies are all about the destruction of the universe, but “Downsizing” is more localized, serious and despairing. Its whole atmosphere is depressed — post-hope.In the movie’s first scene, scientists develop a process by which people can be shrunk to 5 inches in height, a process designed to reduce the human footprint and save the planet. But in practice — this is the movie’s one genuinely clever and poetic touch — people are attracted to downsizing for economic reasons. For an outlay of just $150,000, a person can buy a mansion and finance a life of leisure, without ever having to work again.Matt Damon calls his "Downsizing" co-star Hong Chau "amazing" after the actress scored a Golden Globe nomination for her performance in the movie. (Dec. 12)Matt Damon and Kristen Wiig play a fortyish couple, struggling to buy a first house. They become attracted to downsizing because they grasp that, in the full-size economy, they are always going to be struggling. Though they approach downsizing with some enthusiasm and expectation, we can’t help but see this the way Payne and co-screenwriter Jim Taylor see it, as the self-abnegation of the middle-class, as two people willing to erase themselves and do violence to their own bodies because of the way wealth is allocated in modern America.This is a provocative and arresting opening, but it’s only an opening, and from there Payne must deliver. He does, but only in small ways, such as the careful rendering of Leisureland, the downsized community. In terms of story, or at least narrative interest, “Downsizing” is essentially over less than a third of the way in. Paul (Damon) floats through the movie with a sadness that never lifts, which reflects the movie’s outlook and philosophy.You know a film is bad when even Christoph Waltz can’t save it. He plays Paul’s upstairs neighbor, who is always having wild parties in his fancy apartment, and for a time we think, OK, good, something fun will come from this character. He’s full of mischief. He’s a black marketeer, pirating luxury items (wines, cigars) to the small communities. But nothing really happens.Instead, Payne bogs himself down in a story line about a Vietnamese dissident (Hong Chau), who stows away to Leisureland and, because she didn’t buy in, ends up as a cleaning woman. This leads to a whole rumination on income inequality within Leisureland itself, with the idea, I suppose, that even in a downsized community, hierarchies based on exploitation are inevitable. But it all seems so tired, so good, so preachy, so weak, so without vitality or promise, as though Payne were just indulging in liberal despair, rather than thinking his way through the story.It doesn’t help that he guides Hong Chau to a sentimental performance, full of tearful outbursts, or that he seems to forget that Waltz is even in the picture. Meanwhile there’s poor Matt Damon: If you see “Downsizing” — but why would you? — pay attention to Damon in the movie’s last 45 minutes. Notice how he’s hanging on by his fingernails, really trying. This is an experienced actor pushing through the scenes, actively willing the screenplay to work by investing in every moment. And he can do nothing.In the end, “Downsizing” doesn’t get past its original conceit and doesn’t even work out the implications of its premise. What about predators? When the little people go boating in Norway, what about birds and insects? By the end, “Downsizing” is one of those great ideas that should have just stayed an idea.
2////There’s idiotic, and there’s magnificent, but “The Greatest Showman” is that special thing that happens sometimes. It’s magnificently idiotic. It’s an awful mess, but it’s flashy. The temptation is to cover your face and watch it through your fingers, because it’s so earnest and embarrassing and misguided — and yet it’s well-made.People actually intended this, to make exactly this movie, and Hugh Jackman, as P.T. Barnum, puts it over. Thus, we get the perfect realization of a really bad idea.This modern musical, made directly for film, tells the story of Phineas Taylor Barnum, the 19th century impresario, except that it doesn’t really tell Barnum’s story. Rather, it appropriates his name for a pop-culture sermon on inclusion that lets us know, just in case we didn’t realize, that 500-pound men and bearded ladies are not just perfectly valid citizens but “glorious.” This reaches its climax in an overblown anthem, in which the bearded lady (Keala Settle) leads a squad of circus oddities in proclaiming, “I’m not scared to be seen/ I make no apologies/ This is me!”And, of course, the circus audience goes wild. They just love it! After all, there they are, expecting just another evening of elephants, lions and trapeze artists, and instead they get to witness a really bad song-and-dance number from a future century, guaranteed to make them all feel relieved to be living in the 1800s.The songs were written by Benj Pasek and Justin Paul (“Dear Evan Hansen”), a disproportionate number of which are in the vein of “I am a perfect, beautiful entity in the universe — and no one appreciates me yet — but I’m so wonderful that everybody is going to realize it someday, and even if they never realize it, that won’t make me delusional.” Such songs may be intended as an inspiring paean to misunderstood underdogs, but they sound like the product of self-esteem parenting run amok.Most of the songs in “The Greatest Showman” start slow and quiet, but then, slowly, hot air gets pumped into them, until they climb and climb, ultimately reaching a stratosphere of loud, delirious self-importance — before gently floating back to earth, spent, with a soft and wistful acknowledgment that even the worst musical numbers have to end.These songs are bad, folks. How bad? Midway through the movie, you may find yourself warily eyeing the major characters that haven’t sung yet: “Michelle Williams. She’s bound to sing something. So there’s at least that to sit through.”Williams plays Barnum’s wife, Charity, a woman of means who marries Barnum when he has nothing. The role is an interesting test for Williams’ abilities, not because the role is strong but because it’s weak. The movie gives her nothing to play but happiness and devotion, and yet Williams expands and fills the emptiness, so that we believe in Charity’s intelligence and probity, and in her estimation of her husband as a grand fellow.But every time the movie begins to get interesting, all at once a funny look will cross a character’s face — you know, that odd little expression somewhere between hope and indigestion. Then the music filters in, the awful singing starts, and the audience must ask itself some questions: Bathroom? Popcorn? Or sit there and take it?In all of “The Greatest Showman,” there are only two musical numbers that are worth sitting through. The first is “Never Enough,” for the vocal pyrotechnics of Loren Allred, who is the voice on the soundtrack singing for the Swedish actress Rebecca Ferguson, who plays the Swedish soprano Jenny Lind. And the second is “Rewrite the Stars,” sung by Zac Efron and Zendaya, which is of note for the uniqueness of the staging. Zendaya plays a trapeze artist, so as the two sing about their relationship and the challenges they face as an interracial couple in the 19th century, she flies around the room. It’s a fun scene to watch and provides a nice distraction from the music.As Phillip Carlyle, Barnum’s right-hand man, Efron is an adequate singer and a better than adequate dancer, but half the time he’s dancing next to Jackman, and Jackman is the one to watch. He’s someone no one can help watching. In fact, Jackman is so good at selling this material that he ends up making its weakness stand out in sharper relief. In that way, he almost makes it worse by fully realizing it. We know that these songs will never be performed as well, and they’re still dreadful.Yet in another way, having an actor as talented and likable as Jackman definitely helps. “The Greatest Showman” is the rare case of a movie that is truly wretched without being for one moment obnoxious.
10////Margot Robbie as Tonya Harding in "I, Tonya."Margot Robbie as Tonya Harding in "I, Tonya."Who would have ever imagined Tonya Harding as the subject of a great movie? Tonya Harding, who is remembered, if at all, as a national joke; whose real achievements as a figure skater are completely forgotten, and who was at the center of a scandal that was even more ridiculous than it was shocking. How could a movie about her be anything but a cold-blooded farce, or the equivalent of one of those tabloid shows that you accidentally stumble onto on a Saturday afternoon, and then wonder what’s wrong with your life that you keep watching?“I, Tonya” is a movie that will transform how you feel about Tonya Harding without necessarily altering your opinion of her. That’s a significant distinction. It doesn’t try to change your mind about the facts, but it adds more facts that put things into context. It is irreverent, caustic, brutal and unsparing; but at its core, “I, Tonya” has a generous spirit. Spoiler alert: Tonya kind of got the shaft.It’s a remarkably free piece of work and presumably was that way as originally written in Steven Rogers’ screenplay. At one point Tonya (Margot Robbie), enacting something supposedly from her own past, turns to the camera and says, “This is bull—. I never did this.” Characters throughout directly address the audience in interview scenes, which are set in the present, and these accounts introduce scenes from the past.The characters’ versions of the truth often contradict each other; and yet even when they do, Rogers and director Craig Gillespie have a way of steering the audience to an overall sense of the basic facts. One fact of many: Harding did not exactly luck out in the mother department. Allison Janney — everyone will walk out of the movie talking about her — outdoes herself as LaVona, Tonya’s mother. She sits on a couch, with a parrot on her shoulder, and just spews bile.Actress Margot Robbie was grateful that she was able to approachÂ"I, Tonya" withÂa fresh perspective since she wasn't familiar with Tonya Harding's story.ÂWhat makes Janney so compelling, so chilling and yet so funny as LaVona — both in her modern-day scenes (hooked up to oxygen) and her earlier scenes (smoking constantly) — is the flat, unapologetic directness of her attack and her commitment to the narrowness of LaVona’s point of view. In life, it’s rare to meet someone with no redeeming traits, but in the movies it’s even rarer, because actors are often so vain. But Janney is without vanity here, and without mercy.Harding apparently spent her early life as a punching bag, first for her mother, and then for her husband, Jeff Gillooly (Sebastian Stan), and Gillespie does something very skillful in his depiction of the violence. Though very often the violent moments in “I, Tonya” punctuate scenes that are otherwise farcical and funny, Gillespie, through careful technique, makes sure that the violence never becomes the punch line. Instead, as he films it, violence interrupts the comedy. It is always explosive, unexpected and disturbing.Among other things, “I, Tonya” is a movie about class, as it exists in the United States but also, specifically, in the world of figure skating. Tonya Harding had lots of talent, but in a package the skating world was reluctant to accept. In her homemade costumes, she looked like Patty McCormack in “The Bad Seed,” and her style was more muscular and athletic than the judges were looking for. If life were a movie, she’d have eventually won them over with her working-class charm and the rightness of her vision. Instead, everything went crazy.The movie does assert what might be true, that for a brief window of time, Tonya Harding was the best female figure skater in the world. But the low point comes not long after, when people associated with Harding start a conspiracy to assault her chief rival, Nancy Kerrigan (Caitlin Carver) and eliminate her from competition. What follows unspools as a comic nightmare. That is, it’s comic when we witness it from the outside, with Harding’s witless ex-husband and his friend Shawn Eckhart (Paul Walter Hauser) doing their dangerous re-enactment of “Dumb and Dumber.” But it’s a nightmare when we see it through Tonya’s eyes, as she watches the destruction of her reputation and life’s work.As Tonya, Robbie is coarse and vulgar and smarter than absolutely nobody besides the people closest to her, and she nurses an aura of grievance that is in no way appealing despite its being justified. But Robbie shows us a fierceness in Tonya, an instinct for survival, that’s admirable, and she and the movie remind us that we viewers are not entirely pure in this, that we are all part of Tonya’s exploitation. Robbie does emotionally true, unsentimental work here, and then there’s the physical aspect of her performance to consider, from the body language she adopts for Tonya’s various stages of life to the skating scenes — though body doubles did the big jumps and the spins. Robbie in “I, Tonya” is one of the highlights of the movie year.In closing, something should be said about the feeling of “I, Tonya,” which might not otherwise come across. It’s buoyant. It’s bright. It has lots of pop music on the soundtrack, none of it from 1991 or 1994, and almost all of it from the late 1970s, mostly 1977 and 1978. The movie’s mix of music and era doesn’t quite make sense, strictly speaking, but like everything in this loose, inspired and yet tonally precise film, it feels right.
8////“Call Me by Your Name” is an emphatic celebration of the mystery and power of sexuality, and all its attendant danger, exaltation and tenderness. Here in a small Italian town, close to the sea — where Hellenic statues have a way of washing up onshore — the sun, the water and the surrounding beauty reinforce lust and longing; and everything is suffused with a charged, pagan innocence.It’s the least Puritan of movies, pre-Christian in its sensibility, and will perhaps seem jarring, arriving at this curious time in our cultural life. Based on the novel of the same name by Andre Aciman, “Call Me by Your Name” is the story of a 17-year-old boy named Elio, who becomes attracted to a graduate student, a visiting American scholar staying at the villa owned by the boy’s parents.Luca Guadagnino directs the film with a sense of languor, as though the heat or the beauty of the surroundings were persuading him to slow down and take it all in. He propels the action, not through quick cutting, but through Timothée Chalamet’s remarkably sure-footed performance in the central role. Elio is a gifted young composer and musician, and the movie suggests that his ability to be crazy in love and in pursuit of this somewhat older guy is an offshoot of his talent, of the frequency of his vibration toward life itself.It’s a performance of unexpected authority, the spectacle of someone ready to pounce on these new sensations and experiences. He prowls the villa, almost jumping out of his own skin with an awareness that this is his prime moment in life. We sense that, despite his being little more than a kid, he may never be this powerful, whether creatively, emotionally or sexually. And we sense that he knows it, too, and that he is, in this way, superior to every adult he encounters.This authority of drive makes him very much the equal of the older man, Oliver (Armie Hammer). Elio may have the vulnerability of being young and defenseless against his own desire, but Oliver has the vulnerability of knowing he has already moved out of that golden aura of Eros that Elio inhabits. And so they approach each other, warily, neither admitting what’s going on, while beneath the surface, everything is happening.“Call Me by Your Name” is transcendent in its first hour, communicating much through the camera’s evocation of nature and the screenplay’s clear yet subtle dialogue. Likewise, Hammer’s performance is a brilliant exercise in subtlety, suggesting a genial yet inappropriate space-taking, the carelessness of the beautiful. He lets you feel Oliver’s awareness of Elio even as he’s playing his concealment of it. Oliver is so deft and so unapologetic in his signaling that, only when it’s acknowledged later, we think, yes, of course, that’s exactly what we saw.The movie reaches a climax of sorts in its scene of the two men circling a World War I memorial, one of the many such monuments commemorating the young men from a particular town who were killed. That is civilization — the death and mutilation of young men — while “Call Me by Your Name” is about something outside of that, something elemental. Even once all the cards are on the table, the movie maintains most of its velocity, exploring Elio’s pansexual impulses toward the girls his own age.Where the movie falters is in the portrayal of Elio’s bathetic and tiresome parents — played by Amira Casar and Michael Stuhlbarg — who cosset him and flatter him in a way that feels not only untrue to life but a means of stifling the movie’s anarchy. Stuhlbarg is a particular offender, in that he approaches every scene as if playing one action, which is to beg for love, both from the other characters and the audience.This problem doesn’t go away but blossoms to destructive effect in one of the most cloying screen moments since Anne Hathaway sobbed through “I Dreamed a Dream” in “Les Miserables.” With a tear and a smile, the father reveals his own youthful longings. But no, the intimate history of some cuddly, neutered, pajama-bear dad simply has no business in the world this movie evokes.The effect of Dad’s speech is to take the outlaw, the unapologetically dangerous and glorious and make it palatable — as if we wouldn’t find it palatable without the sanction of the father and, in a larger sense, the patriarchy. It’s to take something huge and vital between two specific people and domesticate it as one more thing in a cycle of endless and common recurrence.The life, the true life and vitality of “Call Me by Your Name,” is a lust-ridden boy putting a man’s underwear over his head and breathing it in. It’s a 17-year-old kid, crazed by hormones, masturbating into a peach. It’s shocking and honest transgression, and to bring in some wistful old dad giving his blessing brings us back to middle-class, happy-liberal safety. It to take a beautiful Greek statue and sink it right back into the sea.And yet ... “Call Me by Your Name” is so brave for so long that despite this glaring flaw, it must be counted among the year’s important movies. Venus de Milo has her arms missing — we take what we can get.
8////Daisy Ridley as Rey  in a still image from "Star Wars: The Last Jedi."Daisy Ridley as Rey  in a still image from "Star Wars: The Last Jedi."Laura Dern is Vice Admiral Holdo in "Star Wars: The Last Jedi."Laura Dern is Vice Admiral Holdo in "Star Wars: The Last Jedi."A still image from LucasFilm's "Star Wars: A Last Jedi."A still image from LucasFilm's "Star Wars: A Last Jedi."Laura Dern is Amilyn Holdo in "Star Wars: The Last Jedi."Laura Dern is Amilyn Holdo in "Star Wars: The Last Jedi."The Millennium Falcon being chased by First Order TIE Fighters in a still image from "Star Wars: The Last Jedi."The Millennium Falcon being chased by First Order TIE Fighters in a still image from "Star Wars: The Last Jedi."John Boyega as Finn battling Gwendoline Christie as Captain Phasma  in a still image from "Star Wars: The Last Jedi."John Boyega as Finn battling Gwendoline Christie as Captain Phasma  in a still image from "Star Wars: The Last Jedi."AT-M6 walkers, along with Kylo's shuttle  in a still image from "Star Wars: The Last Jedi."AT-M6 walkers, along with Kylo's shuttle  in a still image from "Star Wars: The Last Jedi."Adam Driver as Kylo Ren in a still image from "Star Wars: The Last Jedi."Adam Driver as Kylo Ren in a still image from "Star Wars: The Last Jedi."BB-8 in a still image from "Star Wars: The Last Jedi."BB-8 in a still image from "Star Wars: The Last Jedi."Star Wars: The Last Jedi   Poe's Resistance X-Wing  Photo: Lucasfilm Ltd.   Â© 2017 Lucasfilm Ltd. All Rights Reserved.Star Wars: The Last Jedi Poe's Resistance X-Wing Photo: Lucasfilm Ltd. Â© 2017 Lucasfilm Ltd. All Rights Reserved.Star Wars: The Last Jedi  Captain Phasma (Gwendoline Christie)   Photo: Lucasfilm Ltd.   Â© 2017 Lucasfilm Ltd. All Rights Reserved.Star Wars: The Last Jedi Captain Phasma (Gwendoline Christie) Photo: Lucasfilm Ltd. Â© 2017 Lucasfilm Ltd. All Rights Reserved.Daisy Ridley as Rey in a still image from "Star Wars: The Last Jedi."Daisy Ridley as Rey in a still image from "Star Wars: The Last Jedi."Luke Skywalker getting lightsaber from Rey in a still image from "Star Wars: The Last Jedi."Luke Skywalker getting lightsaber from Rey in a still image from "Star Wars: The Last Jedi."Daisy Ridley as Rey in a still image from "Star Wars: The Last Jedi."Daisy Ridley as Rey in a still image from "Star Wars: The Last Jedi."Star Wars: The Last Jedi  Kylo Ren (Adam Driver)  Photo: Lucasfilm Ltd.   Â© 2017 Lucasfilm Ltd. All Rights Reserved.Star Wars: The Last Jedi Kylo Ren (Adam Driver) Photo: Lucasfilm Ltd. Â© 2017 Lucasfilm Ltd. All Rights Reserved.Adam Driver as Kylo Ren in a still image from "Star Wars: The Last Jedi."Adam Driver as Kylo Ren in a still image from "Star Wars: The Last Jedi."Mark Hamill as Luke Skywalker in a still image from "Star Wars: The Last Jedi."Mark Hamill as Luke Skywalker in a still image from "Star Wars: The Last Jedi."Domhnall Gleeson as General Hux in a still image from "Star Wars: The Last Jedi."Domhnall Gleeson as General Hux in a still image from "Star Wars: The Last Jedi."Mark Hamill as  Luke Skywalker in a still image from "Star Wars: The Last Jedi."Mark Hamill as  Luke Skywalker in a still image from "Star Wars: The Last Jedi."Carrie Fisher as General Leia in a still image from "Star Wars: The Last Jedi."Carrie Fisher as General Leia in a still image from "Star Wars: The Last Jedi."Kelly Marie Tran as Rose and John Boyega as Finn  in a still image from "Star Wars: The Last Jedi."Kelly Marie Tran as Rose and John Boyega as Finn  in a still image from "Star Wars: The Last Jedi."Oscar Isaac as Poe Dameron in a still image from "Star Wars: The Last Jedi."Oscar Isaac as Poe Dameron in a still image from "Star Wars: The Last Jedi."The  First Order hangar in a still image from "Star Wars: The Last Jedi."The  First Order hangar in a still image from "Star Wars: The Last Jedi."Chewbacca with a Porg in a still image from "Star Wars: The Last Jedi."Chewbacca with a Porg in a still image from "Star Wars: The Last Jedi."Daisy Ridley as Rey in a still image from "Star Wars: The Last Jedi."Daisy Ridley as Rey in a still image from "Star Wars: The Last Jedi."Gwendoline Christie Captain Phasma and stormtroopers in a still image from "Star Wars: The Last Jedi."Gwendoline Christie Captain Phasma and stormtroopers in a still image from "Star Wars: The Last Jedi."Kelly Marie Tran as Rose and John Boyega as Finn in a still image from "Star Wars: The Last Jedi."Kelly Marie Tran as Rose and John Boyega as Finn in a still image from "Star Wars: The Last Jedi."Oscar Isaac as Poe Dameron in a still image from "Star Wars: The Last Jedi."Oscar Isaac as Poe Dameron in a still image from "Star Wars: The Last Jedi."Chewbacca with a Porg in a still image from "Star Wars: The Last Jedi."Chewbacca with a Porg in a still image from "Star Wars: The Last Jedi."Daisy Ridley as Rey in a still image from "Star Wars: The Last Jedi."Daisy Ridley as Rey in a still image from "Star Wars: The Last Jedi."Poe's X-Wing flies towards the Dreadnaught ship in a still image from "Star Wars: The Last Jedi."Poe's X-Wing flies towards the Dreadnaught ship in a still image from "Star Wars: The Last Jedi."A still image from "Star Wars: The Last Jedi."A still image from "Star Wars: The Last Jedi."A still image from "Star Wars: The Last Jedi."A still image from "Star Wars: The Last Jedi."A still image from "Star Wars: The Last Jedi."A still image from "Star Wars: The Last Jedi."John Boyega as Finn in a still image from "Star Wars: The Last Jedi."John Boyega as Finn in a still image from "Star Wars: The Last Jedi."Adam Driver as Kylo Ren in a still image from "Star Wars: The Last Jedi."Adam Driver as Kylo Ren in a still image from "Star Wars: The Last Jedi."Star Wars: The Last Jedi  L to R: Rey (Daisy Ridley as Rey and Mark Hamill as Luke Skywalker in a still image from LucasFilm's "Star Wars: A Last Jedi."Star Wars: The Last Jedi L to R: Rey (Daisy Ridley as Rey and Mark Hamill as Luke Skywalker in a still image from LucasFilm's "Star Wars: A Last Jedi."A still image from LucasFilm's "Star Wars: A Last Jedi."A still image from LucasFilm's "Star Wars: A Last Jedi."Kelly Marie Tran as Rose and John Boyega as Finn in a still image from LucasFilm's "Star Wars: A Last Jedi."Kelly Marie Tran as Rose and John Boyega as Finn in a still image from LucasFilm's "Star Wars: A Last Jedi."A still image from LucasFilm's "Star Wars: A Last Jedi."A still image from LucasFilm's "Star Wars: A Last Jedi."A still image from LucasFilm's "Star Wars: A Last Jedi."A still image from LucasFilm's "Star Wars: A Last Jedi."A still image from LucasFilm's "Star Wars: A Last Jedi."A still image from LucasFilm's "Star Wars: A Last Jedi."John Boyega as Finn in a still image from LucasFilm's "Star Wars: A Last Jedi."John Boyega as Finn in a still image from LucasFilm's "Star Wars: A Last Jedi."A still image from LucasFilm's "Star Wars: A Last Jedi."A still image from LucasFilm's "Star Wars: A Last Jedi."Benicio del Toro as DJ in a still image from LucasFilm's "Star Wars: A Last Jedi."Benicio del Toro as DJ in a still image from LucasFilm's "Star Wars: A Last Jedi."A still image from LucasFilm's "Star Wars: A Last Jedi."A still image from LucasFilm's "Star Wars: A Last Jedi."A still image from LucasFilm's "Star Wars: A Last Jedi."A still image from LucasFilm's "Star Wars: A Last Jedi."A still image from LucasFilm's "Star Wars: A Last Jedi."A still image from LucasFilm's "Star Wars: A Last Jedi."A still image from LucasFilm's "Star Wars: A Last Jedi."A still image from LucasFilm's "Star Wars: A Last Jedi."A still image from LucasFilm's "Star Wars: A Last Jedi."A still image from LucasFilm's "Star Wars: A Last Jedi."A still image from LucasFilm's "Star Wars: A Last Jedi."A still image from LucasFilm's "Star Wars: A Last Jedi."A still image from LucasFilm's "Star Wars: A Last Jedi."A still image from LucasFilm's "Star Wars: A Last Jedi."A still image from LucasFilm's "Star Wars: A Last Jedi."A still image from LucasFilm's "Star Wars: A Last Jedi."“Star Wars: The Last Jedi” brings something new to the “Star Wars” franchise: an exceptional performance.All “Star Wars” movies end up being remembered, and this one is going to be remembered for Mark Hamill. Here’s an actor who has spent a long time living with Luke Skywalker, being the guy who was in those movies, getting older, getting used to it, rebelling against it, carving out a place inside his head where he can have his own identity. And all of those 40 years of coming to terms with being Luke find their way into this performance.The movie begins maybe five or 10 minutes after “The Force Awakens” ended. Rey (Daisy Ridley) has found Luke on a remote rock of a planet, where he has lived like a hermit for long time. The last movie ended with the suggestion that Luke is the heavy artillery, the Jedi master who is about to get into the fight. But “The Last Jedi” immediately takes a different direction.Luke isn’t interested. He wants no part of any star wars. He may have seemed like a contemplative philosopher at the end of the last episode, but don’t let the gray whiskers fool you. He’s a bitter guy, who looks like Rutherford B. Hayes on a three-day drunk, and he’s filled with self-loathing, cynicism and regret. He looks like what 40 years can do to a person, and the gung-ho kid of yore is nowhere to be found on that face.Behind the scenes: "Star Wars: The Last Jedi"Hamill is completely without compromise here. There’s no twinkle peeking out from between the stern words. There are no new lessons for the veteran to learn, because he has already learned them all, and they have led him to this miserable, solitary existence. What a brilliant turn by writer-director Rian Johnson to land Luke Skywalker in such a way, and what a committed piece of acting by Hamill, who gives this everything he has.As for the rest of the movie, it’s pretty good, not quite in the same league as “The Force Awakens,” but an improvement over “Rogue One.” It has the feel and atmosphere of a “Star Wars” movie and gets pulses going with a strong opening sequence, in which Poe (Oscar Isaac), who always needs a shave, leads a ragtag group of fighters against a fleet of elite starships.The Resistance faces steep odds throughout “The Last Jedi.” Basically, they’re losing the whole time. Still, they have one big advantage over the evil empire, and that comes under the category of faulty construction. Apparently every single device, ship or Death Star created by the Empire operates in a way that, if you just happen to hit one vulnerable spot, the entire thing blows up. Their engineers have just never quite figured a way around that.The Empire’s Supreme Leader Snoke (Andy Serkis) is a large, cadaverous entity with an evil English accent and a long scar on his head that looks like he tried scalp reduction surgery and it just didn’t take. His lieutenant is Kylo Ren (Adam Driver), who is just back from killing his own father, Han Solo. Ren doesn’t feel all that great about what he did. He thinks he probably did the right thing, but he’s just not sure. In a series of telepathic communications, Rey senses the good within him, even if the audience has no idea what she’s seeing.The official trailer for "Star Wars: The Last Jedi."“The Last Jedi” has lots of moving parts, but the action mainly surrounds a couple of ambivalent men, Ren and Luke, and a couple of determined women, Rey and Gen. Leia, who are trying to save the galaxy. It’s good to see Carrie Fisher again, alive through the magic of film. She looks a bit frail, a bit worn down, but then one of the running themes of “The Last Jedi” is the toll that endless conflict takes on the survivors, who live with the awful knowledge that victories are never final. Fisher is the soul of this series, and it’s hard to imagine who could ever take her place.The skillful plotting of “The Last Jedi” means there are lots of surprises, big and small. Whenever you think you know how things will play out, the movie pulls a reversal. Characters take turns being right and being wrong. Nobody knows everything. Johnson is likewise very smart in knowing when to play up the traditional “Star Wars” elements and when to spoof them. For example, Domhnall Gleeson plays a starched Empire general, and just when you’re sure the movie is descending into accidental parody, Johnson reveals the character as intentionally ludicrous.As is often the case with “Star Wars,” a certain battle fatigue begins to set in after two hours, but Johnson possesses an instinct for when he has gone over his limit, and he varies or scales back on the space battles each time he needs to. In any case, it helps that Fisher, Hamill and to an extent Ridley ground the action in deeply wrought emotion.You don’t see many sci-fi action extravaganzas that are about late-middle-aged disappointment, about wondering what it’s all about and whether any of it was worth it. It’s this element that gives “The Last Jedi” an extra something, a fascinating melancholy undercurrent. 
8////Woody Allen has made so many great and near-great movies that every new release begins with an audience wondering — is this going to be another one? Usually, within about 15 minutes, the answer is apparent, and usually the answer is no. That’s how it works, even with the best. Babe Ruth hit a lot of home runs, but most of the time he made an out, and when he did get a hit, it was usually a single.Allen’s latest, “Wonder Wheel” is a single — or maybe it’s a single stretched to a double on the basis of some fancy base running (acting) by Kate Winslet. In almost any other filmmaker’s oeuvre, this film would be considered a highlight. But for the director who made “Hannah and Her Sisters,” “Match Point” and “Blue Jasmine”? It’s right up there with “Melinda and Melinda” and “Scoop.” Good, not great.It takes place in the Coney Island of the 1950s, a colorful place made yet more colorful through Vittorio Storaro’s nostalgic cinematography. The amusement park has seen better days, but it’s still a place of working-class dreams, where average people can buy thrills and laughs with just the change in their pockets. Juno Temple enters the scene, in a pretty dress, looking the embodiment of 1950s young womanhood. She is trying to find her father, who works running one of the rides.In order to enjoy “Wonder Wheel,” it is necessary for the audience to accept a convenience of the plot that doesn’t make much sense: Carolina (Temple) has left her mobster husband and has told her story to the FBI. Now she’s a marked woman. So what does she do? She decides to go stay with her father (Jim Belushi) and stepmother, Ginny (Kate Winslet) at their place in Coney Island. This is the first place that gangsters would look.Even worse, with the approval of her family, she takes a waitress job in a restaurant, where anyone might recognize her. Obviously, there are entire packs of lemmings with better survival instincts than the people in this movie.Temple is more adult and aware here than elsewhere, as radiant and idiosyncratic as a studio-age star. Yet despite the drama surrounding her character, “Wonder Wheel” is really the story of Ginny, who is desperate for love and security and has given up on her explosive, alcoholic husband. On the beach one day, she meets a lifeguard, Mickey (Justin Timberlake), and they start an affair.Woody Allen is perhaps better than any other American filmmaker at depicting the gradual process by which love can go from idyllic to hellish. He also has a way of finding grand moral issues — the matters of conscience that define entire lives — through seemingly small events. Like so many of Allen’s movies, “Wonder Wheel” traces the moral journey of a sympathetic character, who deserves everything she wants. But as beautifully played by Winset, she wants it too much.Timberlake is interesting here, in that he is very good at the moment-to-moment emotions, and yet there is something faintly artificial about his performance, overall. Then again, there is something artificial, or at least heightened and operatic, about the entire movie — the sets, the colors, the situations, the performers. Belushi takes it way over the top as the alcoholic husband and father, as abandoned and fascinating as an understudy tenor finally getting to go on in “Pagliacci.” Yet, like Timberlake, there is something true at the core of what he’s doing.If there’s a weakness to “Wonder Wheel,” it’s that, in the end, all the bigness and bluster don’t land with an impression of importance. Things happen in the lives of these people, and we watch, and we understand that it’s all a very big deal — for them, not us. All the same, “Wonder Wheel” engages our attention from beginning to end.
10////Winston Churchill lived a life that was long and “not … entirely uneventful,” as he once put it, and so it’s only fitting that he should be the subject of movies. Hence, across the veil of years, we have seen tall Churchills, obese Churchills, sloppy Churchills, gross Churchills and scowling bulldog Churchills, and yet not one movie or TV Churchill has come close to giving us the man in full, both in look and spirit, until Gary Oldman in “Darkest Hour.”For viewers interested in history, the fascination of this performance — the sense of actually seeing events we have only imagined — has no comparison in impact besides that of Daniel Day-Lewis in “Lincoln.” There he is — not tall, not especially fat. There he is, not just the voice, but the gestures, which combined an older man’s stiffness with a boy’s enthusiasm and energy.Oldman’s main accomplishment, however, is in the way he captures the many nuances of Churchill’s demeanor and personality. There was something rather cute about Churchill, something lovable about him, which is not to say that Oldman goes around trying to be cute and lovable. Rather, he is irascible and impossible and sentimental and romantic and frustrated. But in all ways, this Churchill is human and authentic, and fighting alone to save his country and the world from Nazi barbarism.Directed by Joe Wright, who visited this era to memorable effect in “Atonement,” “Darkest Hour” deals with the brief span between Churchill’s appointment as prime minister and the fall of France in World War II. It was the period in which Britain had to decide whether to fight on alone or to pursue some kind of negotiated peace on Adolf Hitler’s terms. In Churchill, Britain had a fighting prime minister, but his government was split on the subject, and there loomed a real possibility that Churchill might swiftly be replaced.This is a story that is rarely told, and when told, rarely emphasized. Most Americans are familiar with the period that followed, Britain’s “finest hour,” in which the nation faced Hitler alone for a full year, resisting submarine attack and aerial bombardment. “Darkest Hour” tells the story that preceded it, in which an outgunned, peace-loving nation looked into the abyss and found the will to risk everything.Churchill was the key to that channeling of the national will. But what’s especially effective about the film, and about Anthony McCarten’s screenplay, is that we get to see that this was no obvious decision. King George VI (Ben Mendelsohn) looks upon Churchill as a dangerous old romantic, and what’s more, we understand, through Oldman’s performance, why anyone might feel that way. The movie puts very good arguments for peace — essentially surrender — into the mouth of Lord Halifax. If we know anything about history, of course, we know that Halifax was dangerously, horribly wrong, but Stephen Dillane, who plays Halifax, sounds like the voice of reason compared with Churchill, who was, after all, emotional and quixotic and drank almost enough liquor every day to drown a horse.So, as we watch, we agree with Churchill because we know how things turned out. But the movie makes us wonder: Would we agree if we were actually in that room? As was the case with Lincoln, all the idiosyncrasies that make Churchill human and beloved in retrospect made him a bit suspect in his own time.Wright, whose long, unbroken shot of Dunkirk in “Atonement” was breathtaking, finds moments to insert visual flair into a movie that’s mostly about a man going from room to room, either arguing with people or trying to buck them up. In one scene, Wright shows a British officer in France as seen from above, then moves the camera through the roof and slowly upwards, high into the sky, until we arrive upon the sight of a German bomber, dropping its payload.Though “Darkest Hour” is about grand strategy and policy, much of it is about the personal. Lily James plays one of Churchill’s secretaries and effortlessly embodies the freshness of a new generation and Churchill’s responsibility to the future. We see Churchill in dark moments of doubt, coping with a degree of stress we can hardly imagine. He takes strength in the common people he meets and especially in the advice of his wife, Clementine, rightly played by Kristin Scott Thomas as indulgent yet sensible — a stern corrector, when necessary.“Darkest Hour” is a persuasive window into history, and so arresting in its portrait of one of the 20th century’s most important leaders that every minute of it is absorbing. It runs for two hours, and its only flaw is that it doesn’t go on for six or seven more. I could have easily watched Oldman as Churchill go through the Battle of Britain and past it, all the way up to his speech before a joint session of Congress, a few weeks after the attack on Pearl Harbor.Some movies are just so good that they make you feel grateful to the people that made them. “Darkest Hour” is one of those movies.
8////“The Shape of Water” is writer-director Guillermo del Toro’s first real attempt at a masterpiece since “Pan’s Labyrinth” in 2006, and he comes closer this time than last. It is, frame by frame, a beautiful-looking film, and not only beautiful, but of a piece. Del Toro imagines a whole world, one that has never existed before, and then creates it with a meticulousness and fidelity that can inspire awe.As in “Pan’s Labyrinth,” it is a world of pretty surfaces and underlying evil, an evil that hates innocence and purity. It wants to destroy the good, the pure and the defenseless, and although del Toro is emphatically on the side of the angels, there is something in his artistic impulse that is irresistibly drawn to scenes of violence against the weak. How you see those scenes will determine how you ultimately feel about “The Shape of Water.”To some, the film will seem like a modern myth, a brand-new fairy tale, with Sally Hawkins — as a cleaning woman in a government laboratory — its heroine. I see it as something darker, as a cruel fantasy given a veneer of wholesomeness through its unrelenting pathos. The poignancy, the little smiles and gentleness are a cover for the movie’s aggression, so that even if del Toro’s mind is with Hawkins, his heart is somewhere else and can’t be controlled.This lack of control, this sense of our watching a wildly unconscious document that has been, at the same time, committed to film with precision and planning, makes “The Shape of Water” a movie to be reckoned with. Even if you see it as a film with an ugly spirit — as ugly as its filmmaker believes it to be pure — and even if you see it as phony and not on to itself, it’s a fascinating look inside its creator’s mind.It takes place in the early 1960s. John F. Kennedy is president, and the Cold War is at its most lethal. Elisa (Hawkins) is mute and lives in a small apartment on top of a movie theater with green seats. In fact, everything is green in “The Shape of Water.” Elisa wears a green hat. Men wear green suits. The city buses are green, and all the interiors are green. Del Toro expects us to notice. At one point, Michael Shannon, as a government security expert, tries to buy a green Cadillac, only to be told by the dealer that the car isn’t green. It’s teal.One day at work, Elisa and her friend and co-worker (Octavia Spencer) are brought in to clean a secret lab, where they discover that an amphibian man (Doug Jones) is being held captive. He is going to be studied by the government and then destroyed. In the meantime, he is being tortured by Strickland (Shannon), just for fun.Slowly, but inevitably, Elisa strikes up a friendship with the big-eyed, soulful-looking amphibian fellow. Both can’t speak, but they communicate a shared dislocation and goodwill. For Hawkins, Elisa is an almost entirely silent role, but within those limits, she is able to convey profound depths of feeling. Mawkishness may be the strategy of “The Shape of Water,” but Hawkins occasionally finds her way into something real and moving.Here and there, del Toro locks into a perfect, poetic moment, as when Elisa sits at a table, in her humble apartment, and fantasizes being able to speak, and then being able to sing. The movie lifts into a black-and-white dance number — a brief re-creation of the set and choreography of “Let’s Face the Music and Dance” (from the Astaire-Rogers film “Follow the Fleet”). And then the scene settles back into mundane reality, except that now we know: This reality is not really mundane, because it’s elevated by love and longing.Yet as in “Pan’s Labyrinth,” del Toro can’t contain an impulse toward cruelty, though at least he does a better job of hiding it this time. There’s a core creepiness here, an unwholesomeness that can’t be disguised by the filmmaker’s unconvincing assertion of love’s eternal power.“The Shape of Water” is brilliant, but sick — or maybe it’s sick, but brilliant. In any case, it’s something to see. 
10////The challenge of talking about “The Disaster Artist” is that it’s funnier more often and in more different ways than there are synonyms for hilarious, and that’s even if you want to resort to words like “risible” and “knee-slapping.” This movie is seriously funny, surprisingly funny, not funny in a way that you ever decide to laugh, but funny like you couldn’t keep quiet even if you wanted to. The laughs, as they say, keep coming.The comedy, directed by James Franco, is all about the making of a movie. Though appreciating “The Disaster Artist” hardly depends on this fact, this is actually a true story, about the making of “The Room” (2003), which has apparently gone down in history as one of the most amazingly bad, entertainingly awful films ever made. But — this is important — you do not need to see “The Room” before seeing “The Disaster Artist.” In fact, it would probably be better — more preserving of the freshness of the experience — to see “The Disaster Artist” first.Indeed, if you didn’t know “The Room” existed, you would just assume “The Disaster Artist” to be fiction, not only because the story is so bizarre, but because the treatment of the main character, Tommy Wiseau (played by James Franco), is so unsparing. Rarely, if ever, has a living person been portrayed with such hysterically funny disrespect.Based on the book by Greg Sestero and Tom Bessell — “The Disaster Artist: My Life Inside ‘The Room,’ the Greatest Bad Movie Ever Made” — the movie begins in San Francisco, with Greg (Dave Franco) and Tommy meeting in an acting class at the Shelton Studios on Sutter Street. Greg is too inhibited to be a good actor, and so he is impressed by Tommy, who performs the “Stella” scene from “A Streetcar Named Desire” by rolling on the floor and climbing the scenery.They’re both awful actors — Greg in a curable, normal way, and Tommy in a flashy, permanent way that the world had not yet seen. If originality, even in awfulness, is a form of talent, Tommy has definitely got something.Before we go any further, something must be said about James Franco as Tommy. He goes through the movie in a state of dreamy self-absorption, talking in a strange Eastern Europe accent (even though the character claims to be from New Orleans). The accent, which is weird enough to get a potential laugh out of almost every line, turns out to be a pretty dead-on copy of Wiseau’s actual accent. But Franco does more than an imitation. He climbs into the head of this character and gives us his thought processes, which are ultimately an even greater source of jaw-dropping comic amazement.For a time, Greg is happy to have an older artistic mentor, and Tommy is just happy to have someone, anyone, who looks up to him. They move together to Los Angeles, where they become roommates, and Greg begins to realize that somehow, mysteriously, Tommy has money. After being humiliated by a Hollywood producer who tells him he has no talent (Judd Apatow in a humorous cameo), Tommy decides to write, direct and star in his own movie.“The Disaster Artist” is funny from the beginning, but it becomes downright side-splitting once Tommy gets onto a film set. As everyone knows, this process surprisingly ends up with an actual artifact, a real-life movie. The scene of the movie’s premiere — an extended scene that unfolds slowly — is among the funniest theatrical disasters ever put on celluloid, as uproarious and diverting (and as knee-slapping and risible) as the one in Buster Keaton’s “Spite Marriage” from 1929.In fact, the shelf life of that scene may end up being as long as the one in the Keaton film. It’s hard to imagine “The Disaster Artist” ever not being funny.
